# Ohio Revised Code, the sections this corpus cites.
# Regenerate with `edfund-connect rebuild`. One record per section; records begin with
# a section mark at the start of a line, which the statute's own text never does.

§ derolph-i
title: DeRolph I, 1997
effective: 
legislation: https://www.supremecourt.ohio.gov/rod/docs/pdf/0/1997/1997-ohio-84.pdf
--
[This opinion has been published in Ohio Official Reports at 78 Ohio St.3d 193.]




  DEROLPH ET AL., APPELLANTS, V. THE STATE OF OHIO ET AL., APPELLEES.
                      [Cite as DeRolph v. State, 1997-Ohio-84.]
Constitutional law—Education—Schools—Ohio’s elementary and secondary
        public school financing system violates Section 2, Article VI of the Ohio
        Constitution—Specific school funding statutes that are unconstitutional.
Ohio’s elementary and secondary public school financing system violates Section
        2, Article VI of the Ohio Constitution, which mandates a thorough and
        efficient system of common schools throughout the state. The following
        specific provisions are unconstitutional:
        (a)   R.C. 133.301, granting borrowing authority to school districts;
        (b)   R.C. 3313.483, 3313.487, 3313.488, 3313.489, and 3313.4810, the
              emergency school assistance loan provisions;
        (c)   R.C. 3317.01, 3317.02, 3317.022, 3317.023, 3317.024, 3317.04,
              3317.05, 3317.051 and 3317.052, the School Foundation Program;
        (d)   R.C. Chapter 3318, the Classroom Facilities Act, to the extent that it
              is underfunded.
    (No. 95-2066--Submitted September 10, 1996--Decided March 24, 1997.)
       APPEAL from the Court of Appeals for Perry County, No. 94-CA-477.
                                  __________________
        {¶ 1} The constitutionality of Ohio’s public elementary and secondary
school finance system is at issue in this case. The named plaintiffs-appellants are
the Youngstown City School District Board of Education, Mahoning County; the
Lima City School District Board of Education, Allen County; the Dawson-Bryant
Local School District Board of Education, Lawrence County; the Northern Local
School District Board of Education, Perry County; the Southern Local School
District Board of Education, Perry County; and the superintendents and certain
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




named members of the boards of education of these districts, as well as certain
teachers, pupils and next friends. Numerous organizations representing such
diverse groups as teachers’ unions, administrators, school boards, and handicapped
children, and various legislators, as well as the American Civil Liberties Union and
the Ohio AFL-CIO, have filed amicus curiae briefs on behalf of the appellants.
       {¶ 2} The defendants-appellees are the state of Ohio, the State Board of
Education, the Superintendent of Public Instruction, and the Ohio Department of
Education. The Alliance for Adequate School Funding, Stanley Aronoff, JoAnn
Davidson, and Governor George Voinovich have filed amicus curiae briefs on
behalf of the appellees.
                            PROCEDURAL HISTORY
       {¶ 3} On December 19, 1991, appellants filed a complaint for declaratory
and injunctive relief in the Court of Common Pleas of Perry County, seeking a
determination that Ohio’s system of funding public education is unconstitutional.
Trial began on October 25, 1993 and lasted thirty days, culminating in more than
five thousand six hundred pages of transcript and the admission of approximately
four hundred fifty exhibits into evidence. Sixty-one witnesses testified at trial or
by way of sworn deposition.           Although the parties disagree over the
constitutionality of the relevant statutes, plaintiff and defense witnesses alike
testified as to the inadequacies of Ohio’s system of school funding and the need for
reform. In fact, defendant State Board of Education has not only advocated
comprehensive reform but has stated the following three goals of such reform:
equity, adequacy and reliability of school funding.
       {¶ 4} Following trial, the trial court issued extensive findings of fact and
conclusions of law. The court determined that Ohio’s system of school funding
violates numerous provisions of the Ohio Constitution, including Section 2, Article
VI, requiring a thorough and efficient system of common schools throughout the
state. The trial court ordered the Superintendent of Public Instruction and the State




                                         2
                                   January Term, 1997




Board of Education to prepare legislative proposals for submission to the General
Assembly to eliminate wealth-based disparities among Ohio’s public school
districts. The trial court retained jurisdiction in the matter only for a period of time
to ensure that the order was followed and that appropriate steps were taken to
institute a totally new system of school funding. The trial court also awarded costs
and attorney fees to appellants.
        {¶ 5} The State Board of Education voted not to appeal from the trial court’s
decision. However, the Ohio Attorney General filed a notice of appeal to the Fifth
District Court of Appeals. The court of appeals, in a split decision, reversed the
trial court. The majority relied on Cincinnati School Dist. Bd. of Edn. v. Walter
(1979), 58 Ohio St.2d 368, 12 O.O.3d 327, 390 N.E.2d 813, and found that the
current system of school funding is constitutional. The court also determined that
the trial court had erred in awarding attorney fees to appellants and in retaining
jurisdiction in the case.
        {¶ 6} In his concurring opinion, Judge Reader conceded that current school
funding was insufficient, but was unwilling to find the statutory scheme
unconstitutional. Instead, he stated that it is up to this court to declare the current
system unconstitutional and for the General Assembly to repair it. Despite this
position, Judge Reader emphasized the peculiar nature of this case and the lack of
dispute over the evidence:
        “*** The defendants, the State of Ohio, the State Board of Education, the
Superintendent of Public Instruction, and the Ohio Department of Education in their
appellate brief indicated that there are few facts in dispute. Of course, there aren’t
-- they agreed with almost everything the [plaintiffs] stated. In fact, an examination
of testimony by defense witnesses in this case would indicate that these witnesses
stated that the system of funding was immoral and inequitable. If there was ever a
case where the parties acted more in concert than this one, I haven’t seen it. ***
Further, it is a matter of public record that the appellants, having previously




                                           3
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




indicated their satisfaction with the trial court’s decision, were literally forced to
appeal the ruling.”
       {¶ 7} Judge Gwin, in his dissenting opinion, agreed with the trial court that
Ohio’s statutory scheme for financing its schools violates the “thorough and
efficient” clause of the Ohio Constitution. He stressed that due to the glaring
discrepancies in school buildings, facilities, access to technology and curriculum,
some students within the state are being deprived of educational opportunity.
Furthermore, Judge Gwin stated that the state had shirked its duty to generate
revenue for the schools by underfunding Ohio schools and by permitting schools to
borrow against future revenue. He also criticized the majority for disregarding
certain findings of fact by the trial court and for essentially conducting a de novo
review. Judge Gwin found that the trial court had not abused its discretion in
awarding attorney fees to plaintiffs.
       {¶ 8} The cause is now before this court pursuant to the allowance of a
discretionary appeal.
                                    __________
       Bricker & Eckler, Nicholas A. Pittner, John F. Birath, Jr., Sue W. Yount,
Michael D. Smith and Susan B. Greenberger, for appellants.
       Betty D. Montgomery, Attorney General; Jeffrey S. Sutton, State Solicitor;
Christopher M. Culley and Sharon A. Jennings, Assistant Attorneys General, for
appellees.
       Dinsmore & Shohl, Lawrence A. Kane, Jr., Mark A. VanderLaan, Joel S.
Taylor, David K. Mullen and William M. Mattes, Special Counsel for appellees
State Superintendent of Public Instruction and State Department of Education.
       Ben Espy Co., L.P.A., and Ben E. Espy; Jan Michael Long, urging reversal
for amici curiae members of the Ohio House of Representatives Mary Abel, John
Bender, Ross Boggs, Dan Brady, Samuel Britton, Jack Cera, Jack Ford, Robert
Hagan, David Hartley, William Healy, Troy Lee James, Jerry Krupinski, Lloyd




                                          4
                                January Term, 1997




Lewis, Jr., Sean Logan, June Lucas, Mark Mallory, Dan Metelsky, William Ogg,
Darrell Opfer, C.J. Prentiss, Tom Roberts, Frank Sawyer, Michael Shoemaker,
Betty Sutton, Vernon Sykes, and Charleta Tavares; Ohio Senators Robert Boggs,
Robert Burch, James Carnes, Ben Espy, Linda Furney, Leigh Herington, Jeffrey
Johnson, Anthony Latell, Jan Michael Long, Rhine McLin, and Alan Zaleski; and
U.S. Representatives Louis Stokes, Robert Ney, and Frank Cremeans.
         Joan M. Englund, urging reversal for amicus curiae American Civil
Liberties Union of Ohio Foundation, Inc.
         Means, Bichimer, Burkholder & Baker Co., L.P.A., and Kimball H. Carey,
urging reversal for amici curiae Buckeye Association of School Administrators,
Ohio School Boards Association and Ohio Association of School Business
Officials.
         James A. Ciocia, urging reversal for amicus curiae Cleveland Teachers
Union.
         Spieth, Bell, McCurdy & Newell Co., L.P.A., and Frederick I. Taft, urging
reversal for amici curiae Coalition for School Funding Reform (Bay Village City
School District, Cleveland Heights-University Heights City School District,
Lakewood City School District, and Shaker Heights City School District).
         Patrick F. Timmins, Jr., urging reversal for amicus curiae Coalition of
Rural and Appalachian Schools.
         David Goldberger and Edward B. Foley, urging reversal for amicus curiae
Institute for Democracy in Education.
         Goldstein & Roloff and Morris L. Hawk, urging reversal for amici curiae
Ohio Association of Elementary School Administrators and Ohio Association of
Secondary School Administrators.
         Buckley, King & Bluso, Robert J. Walter and Thomas C. Drabick, Jr.,
urging reversal for amicus curiae Ohio Association of Public School Employees
(OAPSE)/AFSCME Local 4, AFL-CIO.




                                         5
                            SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




       Stewart Jaffy & Associates Co., L.P.A., Stewart R. Jaffy and Marc J. Jaffy,
urging reversal for amicus curiae Ohio AFL-CIO.
       Schnorf & Schnorf Co., L.P.A., David M. Schnorf and Johna M. Bella,
urging reversal for amicus curiae Ohio Federation of Teachers.
       Susan G. Tobin, urging reversal for amici curiae Ohio Legal Rights Service
and Ohio Coalition for the Education of Children with Disabilities.
       Berry, Shoemaker & Clark and Kevin Shoemaker, urging reversal for
amicus curiae Ohio Professional Staff Union.
       Chester, Willcox & Saxbe, John J. Chester and Donald C. Brey, urging
affirmance for amicus curiae Governor George Voinovich.
       Benesch, Friedlander, Coplan & Aronoff, P.L.L., and N. Victor Goodman,
urging affirmance for amici curiae Stanley J. Aronoff, President of the Ohio Senate,
and JoAnn Davidson, Speaker of the Ohio House of Representatives.
       Walter & Haverfield and James E. Betts, urging affirmance for amicus
curiae Alliance for Adequate School Funding.
                                   __________
       FRANCIS E. SWEENEY, SR., J.
       {¶ 9} In 1802, when our forefathers convened to write our state
Constitution, they carried within them a deep-seated belief that liberty and
individual opportunity could be preserved only by educating Ohio’s citizens. These
ideals, which spurred the War of Independence, were so important that education
was made part of our first Bill of Rights. Section 3, Article VIII of the Ohio
Constitution of 1802. Beginning in 1851, our Constitution has required the General
Assembly to provide enough funding to secure a “thorough and efficient system of
common schools throughout the State.”
       {¶ 10} Over the last two centuries, the education of our citizenry has been
deemed vital to our democratic society and to our progress as a state. Education is
essential to preparing our youth to be productive members of our society, with the




                                         6
                                January Term, 1997




skills and knowledge necessary to compete in the modern world. In fact, the
mission statement of defendant, Ohio State Board of Education, echoes these
concerns:
       “The mission of education is to prepare students of all ages to meet, to the
best of their abilities, the academic, social, civic, and employment needs of the
twenty-first century, by providing high-quality programs that emphasize the
lifelong skills necessary to continue learning, communicate clearly, solve problems,
use information and technology effectively, and enjoy productive employment.”
State Board of Education, Preparing Ohio Schools for the 21st Century, Sept. 1990,
ii.
       {¶ 11} Today, Ohio stands at a crossroads. We must decide whether the
promise of providing to our youth a free, public elementary and secondary
education in a “thorough and efficient system” has been fulfilled. The importance
of this case cannot be overestimated. It involves a wholesale constitutional attack
on Ohio’s system of funding public elementary and secondary education.
Practically every Ohioan will be affected by our decision: the 1.8 million children
in public schools and every taxpayer in the state. For the 1.8 million children
involved, this case is about the opportunity to compete and succeed.
       {¶ 12} Upon a full consideration of the record and in analyzing the pertinent
constitutional provision, we can reach but one conclusion: the current legislation
fails to provide for a thorough and efficient system of common schools, in violation
of Section 2, Article VI of the Ohio Constitution.
       {¶ 13} In reaching this conclusion, we dismiss as unfounded any suggestion
that the problems presented by this case should be left for the General Assembly to
resolve. This case involves questions of public or great general interest over which
this court has jurisdiction. Section 2(B)(2)(d), Article IV of the Ohio Constitution.
       {¶ 14} Under the long-standing doctrine of judicial review, it is our sworn
duty to determine whether the General Assembly has enacted legislation that is




                                         7
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




constitutional. Marbury v. Madison (1803), 5. U.S. (1 Cranch) 137, 2 L.Ed. 60.
We are aware that the General Assembly has the responsibility to enact legislation
and that such legislation is presumptively valid. R.C. 1.47(A); Adamsky v. Buckeye
Local School Dist. (1995), 73 Ohio St.3d 360, 361, 653 N.E.2d 212, 214. However,
this does not mean that we may turn a deaf ear to any challenge to laws passed by
the General Assembly. The presumption that laws are constitutional is rebuttable.
Id. The judiciary was created as part of a system of checks and balances. We will
not dodge our responsibility by asserting that this case involves a nonjusticiable
political question. To do so is unthinkable. We refuse to undermine our role as
judicial arbiters and to pass our responsibilities onto the lap of the General
Assembly.
       {¶ 15} We quote, with approval, the Texas Supreme Court’s remarks when
it addressed a similar challenge to its authority to review its state’s school funding
system:
       “‘[W]e have not been unmindful of the magnitude of the principles
involved, and the respect due to the popular branch of the government. ***
Fortunately, however, for the people, the function of the judiciary in deciding
constitutional questions is not one which it is at liberty to decline. *** [We] cannot,
as the legislature may, avoid a measure because it approaches the confines of the
constitution; [we] cannot pass it by because it is doubtful; with whatever doubt,
with whatever difficulties a case may be attended, [we] must decide it, when it
arises in judgment.’” Edgewood Indep. School Dist. v. Kirby (1989), 777 S.W.2d
391, 394, quoting Morton v. Gordon (Republic of Tex.1841), Dallam 396, 397-398.
       {¶ 16} Therefore, we are clearly within our constitutional authority in
reviewing this matter and in declaring Ohio’s school financing system
unconstitutional. We turn now to a review of the record.
             OHIO’S SYSTEM OF PUBLIC SCHOOL FINANCING




                                          8
                                      January Term, 1997




         {¶ 17} Ohio’s statutory scheme for financing public education is complex.
At the heart of the present controversy is the School Foundation Program (R.C.
Chapter 3317) for allocation of state basic aid and the manner in which the
allocation formula and other school funding factors have caused or permitted to
continue vast wealth-based disparities among Ohio’s schools, depriving many of
Ohio’s public school students of high quality educational opportunities.
         {¶ 18} According to statute, the revenue available to a school district comes
from two primary sources: state revenue, most of which is provided through the
School Foundation Program, and local revenue, which consists primarily of locally
voted school district property tax levies. Federal funds play a minor role in the
financing scheme. Ohio relies more on local revenue than state revenue, contrary
to the national trend.
         {¶ 19} Under the foundation program,1 state basic aid is available for school
districts that levy at least twenty mills of local property tax revenue for current
operating expenses.2 R.C. 3317.01(A). State basic aid for qualifying school
districts is calculated each biennium as part of the General Assembly’s budget
pursuant to a formula set forth in R.C. 3317.022.3



1. The current version of the School Foundation Program is contained in R.C. 3317.01 et seq. The
School Foundation Program for allocation of state aid has operated in a similar manner from 1981
through the present day despite numerous amendments. The statutory provisions at issue are those
that were in existence in January 1992 at the time the amended complaint was filed.

2. A mill is one tenth of a cent. The required twenty mills of local tax includes unvoted or “inside”
millage (that portion of the total available ten-mills of unvoted property tax authorized by Section
2, Article XII of the Ohio Constitution that may be levied by a school district) and voted or “outside”
millage approved by the voters. The appellant school districts have all participated in the School
Foundation Program.

3. The formula was as follows: (school district equalization factor X the formula amount X ADM)
- (.02 X total taxable value) = state aid. Former R.C. 3317.022(A). Am.Sub.H.B. No. 298, 144
Ohio Laws, Part III, 3987, 4122. The basic state aid calculation remains essentially the same in the
current version of R.C. 3317.022(A).




                                                  9
                              SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




        {¶ 20} The “formula amount” has no real relation to what it actually costs
to educate a pupil. In fact, Dr. Howard B. Fleeter, Assistant Professor at the School
of Public Policy and Management at Ohio State University, stated that the
foundation dollar amount “is a budgetary residual, which is determined as a result
of working backwards through the state aid formula after the legislature determines
the total dollars to be allocated to primary and secondary education in each biennial
budget. Thus, the foundation level reflects political and budgetary considerations
at least as much as it reflects a judgment as to how much money should be spent on
K-12 education.” (Emphasis sic.)
        {¶ 21} The foundation formula amount, which was set at $2,817 per pupil
in the 1992-1993 school year, 144 Ohio Laws, Part III, 4122, is adjusted by a school
district equalization factor, now called the “cost of doing business” factor. R.C.
3317.02(E). These rates of adjustment vary from county to county and apply
equally to all districts within the county without regard to the actual costs of
operations within the individual school districts. The cost-of-doing-business factor
assumes that costs are lower in rural districts than in urban districts.
        {¶ 22} A target amount of combined local and state aid per district is
reached by multiplying the formula amount, the cost-of-doing-business factor and
the average daily membership.         R.C. 3317.022(A).       However, subtracted or
“charged off” from that figure is the total taxable value of real and tangible personal
property in the district times a certain percentage. Id. Subtracting the applicable
charge-off results in a figure constituting basic state aid for the district in question.
The effect of an increase in this percentage would be to decrease the amount of
basic state aid, resulting in an even greater burden for local schools to fund
education through local property and/or income taxes.
        {¶ 23} The financing scheme is further complicated when special factors
are taken into account. For instance, additional appropriations may be made for
categorical programs, such as vocational education, special education and




                                           10
                                January Term, 1997




transportation. R.C. 3317.024. However, no adjustment is made for the relative
wealth of the receiving district. Moreover, children in funded handicapped “units”
are not included in the state basic aid formula. R.C. 3317.02(A). Thus, funds for
handicapped students, for instance, whose education costs are substantially higher
(due to state mandates of small class size and because of related extra services) are
disbursed in a flat amount per unit (see R.C. 3317.05). If the actual cost exceeds
the funds received, wealthier districts are in a better position to make up the
difference.
       {¶ 24} In addition, school districts with children whose families collect Aid
to Dependent Children (“ADC”) receive additional distributions which increase
according to the concentration of ADC pupils. R.C. 3317.023(B). However, the
level of distributions freezes once the concentration reaches twenty percent. R.C.
3317.023(B)(1). Thus, districts with higher concentrations of ADC pupils are
forced to carry more of the extra cost. Moreover, testimony revealed that above the
twenty-percent concentration level, educational need increases at a faster rate than
the concentration percentage.
       {¶ 25} The School Foundation Program does contain certain guarantees so
that a school district receives the greater of the program amount or the guarantee
amount. See R.C. 3317.04 and 3317.0212. However, testimony revealed that the
guarantees work to the substantial benefit of the wealthier districts and represent a
flaw in the system of school funding, because they work against the equalization
effect of the formula.
       {¶ 26} Another weakness in the system is certain “tax reduction factors”
introduced into law by the General Assembly’s 1976 enactment of R.C. 319.301 in
Am.Sub.H.B. No. 920, 136 Ohio Laws, Part II, 3182, 3194. The purpose of R.C.
319.301, as amended, is to limit growth of real property tax revenues that would




                                         11
                                 SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




otherwise occur as a consequence of inflation of property values.4 R.C. 319.301
requires the application of tax reduction factors when property values increase due
to reappraisal or update. The result is that a school district will receive the same
number of dollars from voted tax levies after reappraisal as it did before reappraisal,
even though real property valuation in the district has increased through real estate
inflation. As a direct result of these tax reduction measures introduced by H.B. No.
920, local revenues cannot keep pace with inflation, and school districts have been
required to propose additional tax levies—most of which ultimately fail.
        {¶ 27} H.B. No. 920 has also resulted in a phenomenon called “phantom
revenue.” As already explained, tax reduction factors limit revenue growth that
would otherwise occur due to inflation of real property values. However, at the
same time, the increased valuation of property is taken into account in the charge-
off portion of the foundation formula. R.C. 3317.022(A). Thus, a school district
can experience an increase in the valuation of its taxable real property without
enjoying any additional income and yet receive less under the formula because the
total taxable value of property has increased.
        {¶ 28} Another inherent weakness in the system stems from forced
borrowing. Districts unable to meet their budgets are forced to borrow funds. The
first type of state-mandated loan is the “spending reserve” loan. R.C. 133.301.
Under the spending reserve loan program, school districts are permitted to borrow
against a subsequent year’s revenue with approval of the Superintendent of Public
Instruction. Id. Although there is a statutory maximum amount that can be
borrowed by a school district, the superintendent may (and does) permit borrowing
beyond that limit. R.C. 133.301(C).




4. Inside millage (millage levied without the approval of the electorate and limited to a ten-mill
ceiling on unvoted property taxes), new construction growth and, of course, tangible personal
property are not subject to tax reduction factors.




                                               12
                                January Term, 1997




       {¶ 29} If a school district cannot meet its current operating needs through a
spending reserve loan, it is then required to seek approval of a loan under R.C.
3313.483. These loans are obtained from commercial lenders. R.C. 3313.483(D).
       {¶ 30} Pursuant to R.C. 3313.483(A), local boards of education in such
circumstances declare by resolution that they are unable to remain open for
instruction and are unable to meet their expenses. The board must then request that
the State Auditor determine that such a condition exists. Id. If the auditor finds
that the board has exhausted all available revenue sources, the auditor must certify
that finding to the Superintendent of Public Instruction and the State Board of
Education and must also certify the amount of operating deficit the district will have
at the end of the fiscal year. R.C. 3313.483(B). A school district that has been
certified as having a projected operating deficit must apply for a loan from a
commercial lender. R.C. 3313.483(D). However, if the commercial loan is denied,
a school district must submit a plan for reducing the district’s budget. R.C.
3313.483(E)(1). The budget reduction plan must provide for repayment of the loan
within two years (ten years for very large amounts), R.C. 3313.483(E)(2), but the
plan need not provide for repayment of any spending reserve loan. The loan is
repaid by diverting funds otherwise available to the school district under the school
foundation program to the commercial lender. R.C. 3313.483(E)(3).
       {¶ 31} Effective December 1992, if a district receives an R.C. 3313.483
emergency school assistance loan in excess of seven percent of the district’s general
fund expenditures and has received a loan under R.C. 3313.483 within the last five
years, the district is subject to state supervision under R.C. 3313.488 for that year
and the ensuing two years. R.C. 3313.4810. School districts subject to state
supervision are prohibited from making any expenditure of money or any
employment, purchase or rental contract, giving any order involving the
expenditure of money, or increasing any wage or salary schedule without written
approval of the superintendent. R.C. 3313.488(A). The debt which stems from




                                         13
                                  SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




mandated borrowing programs is in many instances staggering, and the cyclical
effect of continued borrowing has made it more difficult to maintain even minimal
school operations.        See R.C. 133.301 and 3313.483.                These loan programs,
discussed above, are nothing less than a clever disguise for the state’s failure to
raise revenue sufficient to discharge its constitutional obligations.
         {¶ 32} The School Foundation Program contains no aid expressly for
capital improvements for Ohio’s public schools. Aid for that purpose is provided
by the Classroom Facilities Act, R.C. Chapter 3318. However, the evidence
showed, and the trial court found, that the Act is insufficiently funded to meet the
needs of districts that are poor in real property value.
   A “THOROUGH AND EFFICIENT SYSTEM OF COMMON SCHOOLS”
         {¶ 33} In urging this court to strike the statutory provisions relating to
Ohio’s school financing system, appellants argue that the state has failed in its
constitutional responsibility to provide a thorough and efficient system of public
schools.5 We agree.
         {¶ 34} Section 2, Article VI of the Ohio Constitution requires the state to
provide and fund a system of public education and includes an explicit directive to
the General Assembly:
         “The general assembly shall make such provisions, by taxation, or
otherwise, as, with the income arising                from the school trust fund, will secure
a thorough and efficient system of common schools throughout the State ***.”
         {¶ 35} The delegates to the 1850-1851 Constitutional Convention
recognized that it was the state’s duty to both present and future generations of
Ohioans to establish a framework for a “full, complete and efficient system of


5. Appellants also contend that education is a fundamental right and that the current funding system
violates equal protection. They further argue that the school financing system violates Section 3,
Article VIII and Section 4, Article XII. However, since we decide that Ohio’s school financing
system violates the Thorough and Efficient Clause of our state Constitution, we decline to address
appellants’ other constitutional claims.




                                                14
                                January Term, 1997




public education.” II Report of the Debates and Proceedings of the Convention for
the Revision of the Constitution of the State of Ohio, 1850-51 (1851) (“Debates”).
Thus, throughout their discussions, the delegates stressed the importance of
education and reaffirmed the policy that education shall be afforded to every child
in the state regardless of race or economic standing.          Debates at 11, 13.
Furthermore, the delegates were concerned that the education to be provided to our
youth not be mediocre but be as perfect as could humanly be devised. Debates at
698-699. These debates reveal the delegates’ strong belief that it is the state’s
obligation, through the General Assembly, to provide for the full education of all
children within the state.
         {¶ 36} Dr. Samuel Kern Alexander, a leading professor in the area of school
law and school finance, testified that, in the context of the historical development
of the phrase “thorough and efficient,” it is the state’s duty to provide a system
which allows its citizens to fully develop their human potential. In such a system,
rich and poor people alike are given the opportunity to become educated so that
they may flourish and our society may progress. It was believed by the leading
statesmen of the time that only in this way could there be an efficient educational
system throughout the state.
         {¶ 37} This court has construed the words “thorough and efficient” in light
of the constitutional debates and history surrounding them. In Miller v. Korns
(1923), 107 Ohio St. 287, 297-298, 140 N.E. 773, 776, this court defined what is
meant by a “thorough and efficient” system of common schools throughout the
state:
         “This declaration is made by the people of the state. It calls for the
upbuilding of a system of schools throughout the state, and the attainment of
efficiency and thoroughness in that system is thus expressly made a purpose, not
local, not municipal, but state-wide.




                                         15
                                SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




        “With this very purpose in view, regarding the problem as a state-wide
problem, the sovereign people made it mandatory upon the General Assembly to
secure not merely a system of common schools, but a system thorough and efficient
throughout the state.
        “A thorough system could not mean one in which part or any number of the
school districts of the state were starved for funds. An efficient system could not
mean one in which part or any number of the school districts of the state lacked
teachers, buildings, or equipment.” (Emphasis added.)
        {¶ 38} Cincinnati School Dist. Bd. of Edn. v. Walter (1979), 58 Ohio St.2d
368, 387, 12 O.O.3d 327, 338, 390 N.E.2d 813, 825, cited Miller with approval.
Additionally, Walter recognized that while the General Assembly has wide
discretion in meeting the mandate of Section 2, Article VI, this discretion is not
without limits. Id. Walter found that a school system would not be thorough and
efficient if “a school district was receiving so little local and state revenue that the
students were effectively being deprived of educational opportunity.” Id.
        {¶ 39} Other      states,    in    declaring     their   state    funding     systems
unconstitutional,6 have also addressed the issue of what constitutes a “thorough and
efficient” or a “general or uniform” system of public schools. We recognize that
some of these decisions were decided on different grounds or involved different



6. The following states have declared their school funding statutes unconstitutional: Roosevelt
Elementary School Dist. v. Bishop (1994), 179 Ariz. 233, 877 P.2d 806; DuPree v. Alma School
Dist. No. 30 (1983), 279 Ark. 340, 651 S.W.2d 90; Serrano v. Priest (1976), 18 Cal.3d 728, 135
Cal.Rptr. 345, 557 P.2d 929; Horton v. Meskill (1977), 172 Conn. 615, 376 A.2d 359; Rose v.
Council for Better Edn. (Ky.1989), 790 S.W.2d 186; McDuffy v. Secy., Executive Office of Edn.
(1993), 415 Mass. 545, 615 N.E.2d 516; Helena Elementary School Dist. No. 1 v. State (1989), 236
Mont. 44, 769 P.2d 684; Abbott v. Burke (1990), 119 N.J. 287, 575 A.2d 359; Tennessee Small
School Sys. v. McWherter (Tenn.1993), 851 S.W.2d 139; Edgewood Indep. School Dist. v. Kirby
(Tex.1989), 777 S.W.2d 391; Brigham v. State (Vt.1997), ___ A.2d ___, 1997 WL 51794; Seattle
School Dist. No. 1 of King Cty. v. State (1978), 90 Wash.2d 476, 585 P.2d 71; Pauley v. Kelley
(1979), 162 W.Va. 672, 255 S.E.2d 859; Washakie Cty. School Dist. One v. Herschler (Wyo.1980),
606 P.2d 310.




                                              16
                                January Term, 1997




education provisions. Despite these differences, we still are persuaded by the basic
principles underlying these decisions.
       {¶ 40} For instance, in Edgewood Indep. School Dist. v. Kirby, supra, 777
S.W.2d 391, the Texas Supreme Court invalidated its state funding structure, in
which annual per-student expenditures varied from $2,112 in the poorest districts
to $19,333 in the wealthiest districts. The court noted at 393:
       “Property-poor districts are trapped in a cycle of poverty from which there
is no opportunity to free themselves. Because of their inadequate tax base, they
must tax at significantly higher rates in order to meet minimum requirements for
accreditation; yet their educational programs are typically inferior. The location of
new industry and development is strongly influenced by tax rates and the quality of
local schools. Thus, the property-poor districts with their high tax rates and inferior
schools are unable to attract new industry or development and so have little
opportunity to improve their tax base.”
       {¶ 41} The plaintiffs in Edgewood presented compelling evidence of how
fiscal inequities produced inadequate educational opportunities. The court in
Edgewood stated that the inequalities resulting from Texas’s school funding system
violated the constitutional requirement of efficiency. Thus, the court declared that
the legislature must provide for an efficient system in which funds are distributed
more equitably. As the court noted, at 397, to correct the deficiencies, “[a] band-
aid will not suffice; the system itself must be changed.”
       {¶ 42} The dissent believes that we rely too heavily upon anecdotal
evidence to support our holding that the current system is unconstitutional.
Glaringly absent from the dissenting opinion, however, is any consideration of the
massive evidence presented to us. There is one simple reason for this noticeable
omission. The facts are fatal to the dissent. The dissent wisely recognizes that it
could not, in good conscience, address these facts and then conclude that Ohio is
providing the opportunity for a basic education. Therefore, it does the only thing




                                          17
                                   SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




that it could do, it ignores them. Instead, it turns to facts outside the record and to
laws passed by the General Assembly after this lawsuit was filed as a means of
justifying its position.7 We, however, know that it is imperative to consider the
record as presented to us. In doing so, we find that exhaustive evidence was
presented to establish that the appellant school districts were starved for funds,
lacked teachers, buildings, and equipment, and had inferior educational programs,
and that their pupils were being deprived of educational opportunity.
         {¶ 43} In 1989, the General Assembly directed the Superintendent of Public
Instruction to conduct a survey of Ohio’s public school buildings. Section 8,
Am.Sub.S.B. No. 140, 143 Ohio Laws, Part I, 837. The purpose of this survey was
to determine the cost of bringing all facilities into compliance with state building
codes and asbestos removal requirements, as well as all other state and local
provisions related to health and safety. Id.
         {¶ 44} The results of this study were published in the 1990 Ohio Public
School Facility Survey. The survey identified a need for $10.2 billion in facility
repair and construction.
         {¶ 45} Among its findings, the survey determined that one-half of Ohio’s
school buildings were fifty years old or older, and fifteen percent were seventy
years old or older. A little over half of these buildings contained satisfactory


7. In State v. Ishmail (1978), 54 Ohio St.2d 402, 8 O.O.3d 405, 377 N.E.2d 500, paragraph one of
the syllabus, we held that a reviewing court may not rely upon matters outside the record in deciding
the appeal. Contrary to this holding, the dissent relies upon a nationwide survey of test results which
was not part of the record. Since the dissent finds this way of proceeding acceptable, we feel at
liberty to point out the stark reality of Ohio’s plight. A June 1996 survey conducted by the United
States General Accounting Office demonstrates the woeful lack of progress in Ohio’s schools. The
report notes that ninety-five percent of Ohio’s schools reported a need to upgrade or repair buildings
to good overall condition. School Facilities: Profiles of School Condition by State, A Report to
Congressional Requesters by the General Accounting Office (June 1996) 143. In 1993-1994, Ohio
spent an average of only $38 per student for K-12 school facilities. Id. Additionally, Ohio ranked
last in the number of students per computer among the fifty states. School Facilities: America’s
Schools Not Designed or Equipped for 21st Century, A Report to Congressional Requesters by the
General Accounting Office (Apr.1995) 43.




                                                  18
                               January Term, 1997




electrical systems; however, only seventeen percent of the heating systems and
thirty-one percent of the roofs were deemed to be satisfactory. Nineteen percent of
the windows and twenty-five percent of the plumbing and fixtures were found to
be adequate. Only twenty percent of the buildings had satisfactory handicapped
access. A scant thirty percent of the school facilities had adequate fire alarm
systems and exterior doors.
       {¶ 46} Over three years after the 1990 survey was published, the current
Superintendent of Public Instruction, John Theodore Sanders, averred that his visits
to Ohio school buildings demonstrated that some students were “making do in a
decayed carcass from an era long passed,” and others were educated in “dirty,
depressing places.”
       {¶ 47} Robert Franklin, the Building Assistant Supervisor for the Ohio
Department of Education, gave disturbing examples of incidents where the health
and safety of students were threatened. In Buckeye Local, Belmont County, three
hundred students were hospitalized because carbon monoxide leaked out of heaters
and furnaces. In another school district in Wayne County, an elementary school
built in 1903 had floors so thin that a teacher’s foot went through the floor while
she was walking across her classroom.
       {¶ 48} Another major health and safety hazard is asbestos, which has yet to
be removed from 68.6 percent of Ohio’s school buildings, in direct violation of a
1987 mandate by the United States Environmental Protection Agency. In fact, over
ninety-nine percent of public school structures in Ohio have asbestos in them. Jack
D. Hunter, supervisor of school facilities with the Ohio Department of Education,
testified that around seventy-five percent of Ohio’s public school facilities “have
asbestos that should be abated *** either immediately or near-term.” For fiscal
year 1990, over two hundred forty school districts applied for $140,000,000 in
asbestos-abatement money from the state. Only sixty-three districts received funds.




                                        19
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




       {¶ 49} Other conditions which existed within the appellant school districts
were equally deplorable. The Nelsonville York Elementary School in Athens
County is sliding down a hill at a rate of an inch per month. The school district has
hired a registered surveyor to monitor the building’s movement. At Eastern Brown
High School, the learning-disabled classroom is a converted storage room with no
windows for ventilation; a fan is placed on the floor to provide ventilation. The
students at Ash Ridge Elementary eat lunches at their desks because there is no
school cafeteria.
       {¶ 50} In the Dawson-Bryant school system, where a coal heating system is
used, students are subjected to breathing coal dust which is emitted into the air and
actually covers the students’ desks after accumulating overnight. Band members
are forced to use a former coal bin for practice sessions where there is no ventilation
whatsoever, causing students to complain of headaches. Special education classes
are also held in a former closet that has one bare lightbulb hanging from the ceiling.
       {¶ 51} Deering Elementary is not handicapped accessible. The library is a
former storage area located in the basement. Handicapped students have to be
carried there and to other locations in the building. One handicapped third-grader
at Deering had never been to the school library because it was inaccessible to
someone in a wheelchair.
       {¶ 52} The Northern Local School District in Perry County has also been
plagued with deteriorating facilities, which include bulging bricks and walls which
bow out at the now closed Somerset Elementary School, leaking roofs and
windows, outdated sewage systems which have actually caused raw sewage to flow
onto the baseball field at Sheridan High School, and the presence of arsenic in the
drinking water in the Glenford Elementary School buildings.
       {¶ 53} Equally alarming are the conditions found in the Southern Local
School District in Perry County, where buildings are crumbling and chunks of
plaster fall from the walls and ceiling. In fact, the problem was so severe that the




                                          20
                                      January Term, 1997




principal and custodians at Miller Junior High at Shawnee deliberately knocked
plaster off the ceilings so that the plaster would not fall on the students during the
day.8
         {¶ 54} Appellant Christopher Thompson poignantly described his
experience growing up in this school district. While Chris attended New Straitsville
Elementary School in Perry County, plaster was falling off the walls and
cockroaches crawled on the restroom floors. Chris said the building gave him a
“dirty feeling” and that he would not use the restroom at school because of the
cockroaches. In subsequent years, Chris had to contend with a flooded library and
gymnasium, a leaky roof where rainwater dripped from the ceiling like a
“waterfall,” an inadequate library, a dangerously warped gymnasium floor, poor
shower facilities, and inadequate heating.                In fact, due to construction and
renovation of the heating system, when Chris attended high school, there was no
heat from the beginning of the fall of 1992 until the end of November or beginning
of December. Students had to wear coats and gloves to classes and were subjected
to kerosene fumes from kerosene heaters which were used when the building
became very cold.
         {¶ 55} Obviously, state funding of school districts cannot be considered
adequate if the districts lack sufficient funds to provide their students a safe and
healthy learning environment.
         {¶ 56} In addition to deteriorating buildings and related conditions, it is
clear from the record that many of the school districts throughout the state cannot
provide the basic resources necessary to educate our youth. For instance, many of



8. In late 1990, the Southern Local School District was successful in obtaining Classroom Facilities
Act funds and passed a tax levy and a bond issue to help construct new facilities. However, the trial
court found that even after the completion of the project in 1993, significant problems will remain.
The project will not address all the district’s outstanding needs, and the building assistance program
will not provide operating and maintenance funds to keep the facilities in good working order.




                                                 21
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




the appellant school districts have insufficient funds to purchase textbooks and must
rely on old, outdated books. For some classes, there were no textbooks at all. For
example, at Southern Local during the 1992-1993 school year, none of the students
in a Spanish I class had a textbook at the beginning of the year. Later, there was a
lottery for books. Students who picked the lucky numbers received a book.
       {¶ 57} The accessibility of everyday supplies is also a problem, forcing
schools to ration such necessities as paper, chalk, art supplies, paper clips and even
toilet paper. A system without basic instructional materials and supplies can hardly
constitute a thorough and efficient system of common schools throughout the state
as mandated by our Constitution.
       {¶ 58} Additionally, many districts lack sufficient funds to comply with the
state law requiring a district-wide average of no more than twenty-five students for
each classroom teacher. Ohio Adm.Code 3301-35-03(A)(3). Indeed, some schools
have more than thirty students per classroom teacher, with one school having as
many as thirty-nine students in one sixth grade class. As the testimony of educators
established, it is virtually impossible for students to receive an adequate education
with a student-teacher ratio of this magnitude.
       {¶ 59} The curricula in the appellant school districts are severely limited
compared to other school districts and compared to what might be expected of a
system designed to educate Ohio’s youth and to prepare them for a bright and
prosperous future. For example, elementary students at Dawson-Bryant have no
opportunity to take foreign language courses, computer courses, or music or art
classes other than band. Junior high students in this district have no science lab. In
addition, Dawson-Bryant offers no honors program and no advanced placement
courses, which disqualifies some of the students from even being considered for a
scholarship or admittance to some universities. Dawson-Bryant is not alone—
similar problems were being experienced by each of the appellant school districts.




                                         22
                                January Term, 1997




        {¶ 60} None of the appellant school districts is financially able to keep up
with the technological training needs of the students in the districts. The districts
lack sufficient computers, computer labs, hands-on computer training, software,
and related supplies to properly serve the students’ needs. In this regard, it does
not appear likely that the children in the appellant school districts will be able to
compete in the job market against those students with sufficient technological
training.
        {¶ 61} Lack of sufficient funding can also lead to poor academic
performance. Proficiency tests are a method of measuring education. The ninth
grade proficiency test was designed to measure that body of knowledge pupils are
expected to have mastered by the ninth grade. R.C. 3301.0710. Passage of the
ninth grade proficiency test is required before a student may receive a high school
diploma. R.C. 3313.61(A). As of the fall of 1993, thirty-two out of ninety-nine
seniors at Dawson-Bryant had not passed all parts of the ninth grade proficiency
test. This means that nearly one third of the senior class had not met basic
graduation requirements. The district did not have enough money to pay tutors to
assist these students. Poor performance on the ninth grade proficiency tests is
further evidence that these schools lack sufficient funds with which to educate their
students.
        {¶ 62} The dissent emphasizes that since schools have complied with
minimum standards enacted in 1983, students are being provided with an adequate
education. However, in March 1992, the State Superintendent suspended routine
minimum standard evaluations. Consequently, these minimum standards have not
been regularly enforced since that time.
        {¶ 63} All the facts documented in the record lead to one inescapable
conclusion—Ohio’s elementary and secondary public schools are neither thorough
nor efficient. The operation of the appellant school districts conflicts with the
historical notion that the education of our youth is of utmost concern and that Ohio




                                           23
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




children should be educated adequately so that they are able to participate fully in
society. Our state Constitution was drafted with the importance of education in
mind. In contrast, education under the legislation being reviewed ranks miserably
low in the state’s priorities. In fact, the formula amount is established after the
legislature determines the total dollars to be allocated to primary and secondary
education in each biennial budget. Consequently, the present school financing
system contravenes the clear wording of our Constitution and the framers’ intent.
       {¶ 64} Furthermore, rather than following the constitutional dictate that it
is the state’s obligation to fund education (as this opinion has repeatedly
underscored), the legislature has thrust the majority of responsibility upon local
school districts. This, too, is contrary to the clear wording of our Constitution. The
responsibility for maintaining a thorough and efficient school system falls upon the
state. When a district falls short of the constitutional requirement that the system
be thorough and efficient, it is the state’s obligation to rectify it. See DuPree v.
Alma School Dist. No. 30 (1983), 279 Ark. 340, 349, 651 S.W.2d 90, 95.
       {¶ 65} Also, when we apply the tests of Miller and Walter as to what is
meant by the words “thorough and efficient,” the evidence is overwhelming that
many districts are “starved for funds,” and lack teachers, buildings, or equipment.
These school districts, plagued with deteriorating buildings, insufficient supplies,
inadequate curricula and technology, and large student-teacher ratios, desperately
lack the resources necessary to provide students with a minimally adequate
education. Thus, according to the tests of Miller and Walter, it is painfully obvious
that the General Assembly, in structuring school financing, has failed in its
constitutional obligation to ensure a thorough and efficient system of common
schools. Clearly, the current school financing scheme is a far cry from thorough
and efficient. Instead, the system has failed to educate our youth to their fullest
potential.




                                         24
                                January Term, 1997




       {¶ 66} In so finding, we reject appellees’ contention that Walter is
controlling. The equal yield formula challenged in Walter was repealed shortly
after the case was decided. See former R.C. 3317.022 as amended by Am.Sub.S.B.
No. 221, 137 Ohio Laws, Part I, 581, and repealed by Am.Sub.S.B. No. 59, 138
Ohio Laws, Part I, 188, 200, 230. Moreover, Walter involved a challenge to only
one aspect of school funding. In contrast, the case at bar involves a wholesale
constitutional attack on the entire system. Additionally, in creating the funding
system at issue in Walter, the General Assembly had relied on a determination of a
legislative committee that the statutorily guaranteed amount actually was sufficient
to provide a high quality education. Id., 58 Ohio St.2d at 372, 12 O.O.3d at 329,
390 N.E.2d at 817. Here, however, the evidence clearly indicates that the funding
level set by today’s School Foundation Program has absolutely no connection with
what is necessary to provide each district enough money to ensure an adequate
educational program. The system in place today differs dramatically from that in
place nearly twenty years ago; thus, our holding in Walter does not control the
outcome in this case.
       {¶ 67} We also reject the notion that the wide disparities in educational
opportunity are caused by the poorer school districts’ failure to pass levies. The
evidence reveals that the wide disparities are caused by the funding system’s
overreliance on the tax base of individual school districts. What this means is that
the poor districts simply cannot raise as much money even with identical tax effort.
For example, total assessed property valuation in the Dawson-Bryant School
District in 1991 was $28,882,580, while Beachwood School District in Cuyahoga
County had $376,229,512. (The two districts have about the same number of
pupils.)
       {¶ 68} We recognize that disparities between school districts will always
exist. By our decision today, we are not stating that a new financing system must
provide equal educational opportunities for all. In a Utopian society, this lofty goal




                                         25
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




would be realized. We, however, appreciate the limitations imposed upon us. Nor
do we advocate a “Robin Hood” approach to school financing reform. We are not
suggesting that funds be diverted from wealthy districts and given to the less
fortunate. There is no “leveling down” component in our decision today.
       {¶ 69} Moreover, in no way should our decision be construed as imposing
spending ceilings on more affluent school districts. School districts are still free to
augment their programs if they choose to do so. However, it is futile to lay the
entire blame for the inadequacies of the present system on the taxpayers and the
local boards of education. Although some districts have the luxury of deciding
where to allocate extra dollars, many others have the burden of deciding which
educational programs to cut or what financial institution to contact to obtain yet
another emergency loan. Our state Constitution makes the state responsible for
educating our youth. Thus, the state should not shirk its obligation by espousing
cliches about “local control.”
       {¶ 70} We recognize that money alone is not the panacea that will transform
Ohio’s school system into a model of excellence. Although a student’s success
depends upon numerous factors besides money, we must ensure that there is enough
money that students have the chance to succeed because of the educational
opportunity provided, not in spite of it. Such an opportunity requires, at the very
least, that all of Ohio’s children attend schools which are safe and conducive to
learning. At the present, Ohio does not provide many of its students with even the
most basic of educational needs.
       {¶ 71} Since the filing of this lawsuit, the General Assembly has scrambled
to enact new laws to soften the blow of the failing system. For instance, beginning
in 1992, “equity funds” were provided to supplement distributions under the
funding system to those districts with low property valuations and low income.
R.C. 3317.0213 and 3317.0214 (Sub.H.B. No. 671, 144 Ohio Laws, Part IV, 6062,
effective 6-30-92). In addition, funds were appropriated for technology grants to




                                          26
                                 January Term, 1997




assist poorer school districts in purchasing computer equipment. Id. at Section 4.
However, appropriations for computers are meaningless when school systems
cannot use the equipment due to asbestos, faulty electrical wiring, or the lack of
teachers. While these programs and funds are desperately needed, they simply are
insufficient to get the job done and do not rectify the serious problems inherent in
Ohio’s financing scheme.
        {¶ 72} School funding has been, and continues to be, a Herculean task. As
thirty-seven lawmakers concede in their amicus curiae brief, despite their recent
efforts, the General Assembly has not funded our public schools properly. They
assert that unless this court rules in favor of the appellants, the urgency of resolving
public school funding will quickly fade.        We find that this brief eloquently
expresses the helplessness felt even by many of our state legislators.
                                   CONCLUSION
        {¶ 73} We know that few issues have the potential to stir such passion as
school financing. In many districts in this great state of ours, students and teachers
must fight a demoralizing uphill battle to make the system work. All parties
concede that the current system needs to be reformed.
        {¶ 74} By our decision today, we send a clear message to lawmakers: the
time has come to fix the system. Let there be no misunderstanding. Ohio’s public
school financing scheme must undergo a complete systematic overhaul. The
factors which contribute to the unworkability of the system and which must be
eliminated are (1) the operation of the School Foundation Program, (2) the
emphasis of Ohio’s school funding system on local property tax, (3) the
requirement of school district borrowing through the spending reserve and
emergency school assistance loan programs, and (4) the lack of sufficient funding
in the General Assembly’s biennium budget for the construction and maintenance
of public school buildings. The funding laws reviewed today are inherently
incapable of achieving their constitutional purpose.




                                          27
                                   SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




         {¶ 75} We therefore hold that Ohio’s elementary and secondary public
school financing system violates Section 2, Article VI of the Ohio Constitution,
which mandates a thorough and efficient system of common schools throughout the
state. The following specific provisions are unconstitutional:
         (a)    R.C. 133.301, granting borrowing authority to school districts;
         (b)      R.C. 3313.483, 3313.487, 3313.488, 3313.489, and 3313.4810, the
emergency school assistance loan provisions;
         (c)      R.C. 3317.01, 3317.02, 3317.022, 3317.023, 3317.024, 3317.04,
3317.05, 3317.051 and 3317.052, the School Foundation Program.
         (d)      R.C. Chapter 3318, the Classroom Facilities Act, to the extent that
it is underfunded.
                                            REMEDY
         {¶ 76} Although we have found the school financing system to be
unconstitutional, we do not instruct the General Assembly as to the specifics of the
legislation it should enact.9 However, we admonish the General Assembly that it
must create an entirely new school financing system. In establishing such a system,
the General Assembly shall recognize that there is but one system of public
education in Ohio. It is a statewide system, expressly created by the state’s highest
governing document, the Constitution. Thus, the establishment, organization and
maintenance of public education are the state’s responsibility. Because of its
importance, education should be placed high in the state’s budgetary priorities. A
thorough and efficient system of common schools includes facilities in good repair
and the supplies, materials, and funds necessary to maintain these facilities in a safe
manner, in compliance with all local, state, and federal mandates.


9. The dissent faults us for failing to provide specific guidelines for the General Assembly to follow.
However, we recognize that the proper scope of our review is limited to determining whether the
current system meets constitutional muster. We refuse to encroach upon the clearly legislative
function of deciding what the new legislation will be.




                                                  28
                                      January Term, 1997




         {¶ 77} We recognize that a new funding system will require time for
adequate study, drafting of the appropriate legislation and transition from the
present scheme of financing to one in conformity with this decision. Therefore, we
stay the effect of this decision for twelve months.
         {¶ 78} Appellants are entitled to recover against the state their attorney fees
and costs as found by the trial court. Motorists Mut. Ins. Co. v. Brandenburg
(1995), 72 Ohio St.3d 157, 160, 648 N.E.2d 488, 490.
         {¶ 79} The court of appeals’ judgment is reversed. We remand this cause
to the trial court with directions to enter judgment consistent with this opinion. The
trial court is to retain jurisdiction until the legislation is enacted and in effect, taking
such action as may be necessary to ensure conformity with this opinion.10
                                                                             Judgment reversed
                                                                           and cause remanded.
         DOUGLAS, RESNICK and PFEIFER, JJ., concur and concur separately.
         MOYER, C.J., COOK and LUNDBERG STRATTON, JJ., dissent.
                                    __________________
         DOUGLAS, J., concurring.
         {¶ 80} I concur in the courageous and well-reasoned decision of the
majority.     Specifically, I agree that the statutory scheme for funding public
elementary and secondary education in Ohio clearly violates Section 2, Article VI
of the Ohio Constitution. I write separately only for the purposes of offering some
additional explanation why Ohio’s statutory scheme violates this provision, to
express my view that public education in Ohio is a fundamental constitutional right,
and to point out that Ohio’s statutory scheme for funding public elementary and
secondary schools also violates other constitutional provisions not addressed in the
majority opinion.

10. We grant plenary jurisdiction to the trial court to enforce our decision. This authority includes
the right to petition this court for guidance, if the need arises.




                                                 29
                                  SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




         {¶ 81} The time has come to end the fact that, in too many cases, the quality
of a child’s education in Ohio is dependent on the vicissitudes of geography—that
is, the place of the child’s birth or residence. After an exhaustive review of the
record, I am also convinced that it is time for the General Assembly to set education
standards and to require performance of the education establishment, with rewards
when they meet the standards or severe corrective action when they do not. This
should include mandates for cost cutting (additional money is not the only answer)
and cost containment with clear accountability.
         {¶ 82} To do this and be fair, however, each district must be given school
structures that are safe and conducive to learning, including the necessary fixtures,
equipment and supplies that ensure thorough and efficient opportunity to learn. In
addition, each district must be placed on a financial footing that permits the district
to compete so as to meet the prescribed standards. That is not only a mandate of
equity. It is what our Constitution requires.
         {¶ 83} By today’s decision, a majority of this court has given the General
Assembly the opportunity to revamp the entire education system in this state just
as a number of other legislative bodies in our sister states have done in recent
years.11 If all of this requires additional revenue, as it almost certainly does, then
that is the price we must pay to enforce, protect and preserve constitutional rights.
I would only caution those who would castigate us (as some did the trial judge) for
their own purposes to remember what Abraham Lincoln said in his First Inaugural
Address, March 4, 1861, in discussing the obligations of the United States Supreme
Court and its decisions:
         “It is a duty from which they may not shrink to decide cases properly
brought before them, and it is no fault of theirs if others seek to turn their decisions


11. An outstanding example of this is the state of Kentucky, as so clearly chronicled in a series of
recent articles in both the Canton Repository and the Akron Beacon Journal.




                                                30
                                January Term, 1997




to political purposes.” Lott, The Presidents Speak; The Inaugural Addresses of the
American Presidents, from Washington to Clinton (1994) 143.
                                          I
                         Jurisdiction and Judicial Review
       {¶ 84} This appeal presents a number of issues for this court’s
consideration. Is the right to a free public education a fundamental right guaranteed
by the Ohio Constitution? Does the system of funding public elementary and
secondary schools in Ohio violate the Equal Protection Clause of Section 2, Article
I of the Ohio Constitution? Does the system of funding public elementary and
secondary schools in Ohio violate Section 2, Article VI of the Ohio Constitution,
requiring a thorough and efficient system of common schools throughout the state?
Does Cincinnati City School Dist. Bd. of Edn. v. Walter (1979), 58 Ohio St.2d 368,
12 O.O.3d 327, 390 N.E.2d 813, control the disposition of the case at bar?
Resolution of these issues requires, among other things, a detailed understanding
of Ohio’s system of school funding. Equally important to a resolution of these
issues are an understanding of the historical development of Ohio’s school funding
laws and an earnest appreciation of the significance that the founders of our state
and nation placed on public education. However, before addressing these various
matters, I find it necessary to briefly comment on this court’s jurisdiction to
entertain the present appeal.
       {¶ 85} The court of appeals’ majority held that the courts are not the proper
place to challenge the constitutionality of Ohio’s statutory scheme for school
funding.   Despite overwhelming evidence that the state has utterly failed to
establish a system of school funding that is thorough and efficient, the court of
appeals’ lead opinion stated that “[i]f changes are needed in the manner in which
schools receive funding, this matter is properly within the discretion of the
legislative branch of the government, not the judicial branch.” Judge Reader
reiterated these sentiments in his concurring opinion. However, I respectfully




                                         31
                              SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




disagree with that view. Rather, I believe that Judge Gwin of the court of appeals
was absolutely correct that the constitutionality of Ohio’s statutory framework for
school funding is unquestionably a matter for the courts to decide. To hold
otherwise would be to ignore the fundamental concept of judicial review
established nearly two hundred years ago in Marbury v. Madison (1803), 5 U.S.
137, 177-178, 2 L.Ed. 60, 73-74. Marbury established, beyond cavil, the inherent
powers of the judicial branch of government to review the constitutionality of the
acts of the other branches of government.
        {¶ 86} In Walter, 58 Ohio St.2d 368, 12 O.O.3d 327, 390 N.E.2d 813, this
court entertained certain constitutional challenges to a statutory system for school
funding that has since been repealed and replaced with the current statutory
framework for funding public elementary and secondary education. However, the
following observations in Walter concerning the power of the judiciary are as
applicable today as they were at the time Walter was decided:
        “We wish to state clearly at the outset that this court has the authority, and
indeed the duty, to review legislation to determine its constitutionality under the
Constitution of Ohio and to declare statutes inoperative. The doctrine of judicial
review articulated by Chief Justice John Marshall in the landmark case of Marbury
v. Madison (1803), 5 U.S. (1 Cranch) 137, establishes the judicial branch as the
final arbiter in interpreting the Constitution.
        “The doctrine of judicial review is so well established that it is beyond cavil.
Consider this court’s opinion in State v. Masterson (1962), 173 Ohio St. 402 [20
O.O.2d 36, 38, 183 N.E.2d 376, 379], which states, at page 405, in part:
        “‘It has long been an established principle of law that courts do not interfere
in political or legislative matters except in those instances where legislative
enactments violate the basic law. In those instances where enactments violate the
basic law, it was determined early in our judicial history that the courts have not
only the power but the duty to declare such enactments invalid.




                                           32
                                 January Term, 1997




        “‘One of the basic functions of the courts under our system of separation of
powers is to compel the other branches of government to conform to the basic law.’
        “* * *
        “We find that the issue concerning legislation passed by the General
Assembly pursuant to Section 2 of Article VI of the Ohio Constitution [the
Thorough and Efficient Clause] presents a justiciable controversy. * * *” Walter,
58 Ohio St.2d at 383-384, 12 O.O.3d at 336, 390 N.E.2d at 823-824.
        {¶ 87} Walter makes it abundantly clear that constitutional challenges to the
statutory system for funding public education are a matter for the courts to decide.
Obviously, this court is not at liberty to shirk that responsibility, and we cannot
simply send plaintiffs-appellants to the General Assembly to seek redress of their
grievances. Judge Reader stated in his concurring opinion in the court of appeals:
“The tax payers of this state should rise up in righteous indignation and tell all the
parties in this case to take their truckloads of paper and solutions if any, to where it
would do the most good—the General Assembly of the State of Ohio.” However,
this case involves a constitutional attack on Ohio’s system of funding public
schools. The General Assembly is not the appropriate place to raise such a
constitutional challenge.
        {¶ 88} I completely agree with the majority’s astute observations
concerning the jurisdiction of this court to resolve this case. Specifically, I join the
majority in utterly rejecting any suggestion that this case and the constitutional
issues involved herein should be left for the legislature to decide. In my view,
fifteen of the most compelling words spoken at the one-and-one-half-hour oral
argument of this case were spoken by plaintiffs’ counsel: “We’re not asking you
to do their job, we’re asking you to do your job.” Accordingly, we have proceeded
not with any glee but, rather, pursuant to our constitutional duty.




                                          33
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




       {¶ 89} The cause is properly before this court for review and final
determination pursuant to the judicial powers vested in this court pursuant to the
Ohio Constitution.
                                          II
                     Ohio’s System of Public School Funding
       {¶ 90} The focus of this case is R.C. Chapter 3317, the School Foundation
Program for the allocation of state basic aid. In Walter, 58 Ohio St.2d at 378, 12
O.O.3d at 333, 390 N.E.2d at 820, this court recognized that “[t]he history of
educational funding in Ohio * * * has been an accommodation between two
competing interests—the interest in local control of educational programs and the
means to fund them and the interest of the state in insuring that all children receive
an adequate education.” In Walter, we outlined some of the history of Ohio school
funding, and a review of that history is pertinent to the discussion herein.
       {¶ 91} In 1821, the Ohio General Assembly enacted a bill making the
property in the townships subject to school taxes. See 19 Ohio Laws 51, 55. This
legislation was largely ineffective because the levying and collection of taxes were
at the option of the local district. In 1825, the General Assembly enacted legislation
directing county commissioners to levy a real property tax of one-half mill to
support local public schools. 23 Ohio Laws 36, 37. At that time in history, the
property tax was the primary means of support for the local public schools. See
Walter, 58 Ohio St.2d at 378, 12 O.O.3d at 333, 390 N.E.2d at 820. In 1906, Ohio
undertook a program calling for a large measure of state financial participation to
begin assisting financially weak school districts for the purpose of providing those
districts with some minimum support for education. Id. In 1935, the General
Assembly enacted the first Foundation Program, providing substantial financial aid
to school districts based on average daily attendance plus additional aid for poorer
districts. Id. at 378, 12 O.O.3d at 333, 390 N.E.2d at 820-821. The amount of state
aid was continually increased over the next twenty-one years. Id. at 379, 12 O.O.3d




                                         34
                                January Term, 1997




at 333, 390 N.E.2d at 821. However, despite the increases in the total amount of
state aid, the percentage of state support dropped considerably in relation to the
local school districts’ total operating costs. Id. In 1956, the format of state aid was
changed to provide state support based on “teacher-units” rather than average daily
membership.     Id.   By the 1965-1966 school year, the state was providing
approximately one-third of the total operating costs of the local school districts,
with local property tax furnishing the remainder. Id.
       {¶ 92} In fiscal year 1975-1976, the General Assembly enacted the “Equal
Yield Formula” for computing state aid. 136 Ohio Laws 475. See Walter, at 379,
12 O.O.3d at 334, 390 N.E.2d at 821. This formula was intended to provide an
equal sum of combined state and local funds on a per-pupil-per-mill basis for each
qualifying school district. Id.; former R.C. 3317.022, 136 Ohio Laws, Part I, 492.
A qualifying school district was one that levied twenty mills for current operating
expenses. Former R.C. 3317.01, 136 Ohio Laws, Part I, 487. The formula provided
a two-tiered system. That is, every school district received an amount per pupil per
mill for the first twenty mills and additional amounts were given to each school
district with millage above twenty mills up to thirty mills. Walter at 370-371, 12
O.O.3d at 328-329, 390 N.E.2d at 816.           In Walter, this court reviewed the
constitutionality of the Equal Yield Formula for school funding and, in 1979,
upheld that formula as constitutionally acceptable. There is a body of thought that
the General Assembly created the Equal Yield Formula in anticipation of the filing
of the Walter case. After Walter was decided, the General Assembly, in 1981,
abandoned the Equal Yield Formula, former R.C. 3317.022. See Am.Sub.H.B. No.
694, 139 Ohio Laws, Part II, 3460, 3684. At that time, the Equal Yield Formula
was replaced by the School Foundation Program, which remains in use today.
                                          A
                          The School Foundation Program




                                          35
                              SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




       {¶ 93} Ohio’s School Foundation Program can be found in R.C. 3317.01 et
seq. The School Foundation Program for the allocation of state basic aid has
operated in a similar manner since 1981. Under the School Foundation Program,
state basic aid is available for school districts which, among other things, levy at
least twenty mills of local property tax revenue for current operating expenses.
R.C. 3317.01(A). State basic aid for qualifying school districts is calculated
pursuant to a foundation formula set forth by law. The version of R.C. 3317.022
that was in effect at the time this case was filed (Am.Sub.H.B. No. 298, 144 Ohio
Laws, Part III, 3987, 4122) provided the following calculation for the computation
and distribution of state aid to qualifying school districts:
        (school district equalization factor X the formula amount X ADM)
                             - (.02 X total taxable value).
       {¶ 94} The basic state aid calculation remains essentially the same in the
current version of R.C. 3317.022. Through this formula, the School Foundation
Program guarantees a minimum level of combined state and local per pupil funding.
                                The Formula Amount
       {¶ 95} The “formula amount” in the calculation represents a figure set by
the General Assembly as part of the biennial budget process. In January 1992, at
the time the amended complaint was filed, the formula amount equaled $2,817. See
Am.Sub.H.B. No. 298, 144 Ohio Laws, Part III, 3987, 4122. The formula amount
is currently set at $3,500 pursuant to R.C. 3317.022. The trial court found (and the
evidence supports the finding) that the formula amount is determined by the
General Assembly based solely on how much money is left in the budget after all
other legal entitlements are funded. In other words, the amount appropriated for
education represents a “budgetary residual” that has nothing to do with the true
costs of educating a student. Oliver Ocasek, President of the State Board of
Education at the time of trial, testified that the State Board of Education believed
that a formula amount of $4,000 per pupil was necessary to even approach an




                                          36
                                 January Term, 1997




adequate level of funding for Ohio’s school districts. It should be noted, however,
that Ocasek personally believed that the true egregious impact of the School
Foundation Program was that it did not even come close to providing equalization,
given the flat distributions in areas of categorical funding, etc., explained infra.
                        The Cost-Of-Doing-Business Factors
        {¶ 96} Under the state basic aid calculation, the formula amount ($2,817 in
school year 1992-1993) is adjusted by a school district equalization factor or cost-
of-doing-business factor. R.C. 3317.022(E). The applicable rates of adjustment
for the 1992-1993 school year were contained in former R.C. 3317.02(E). 144 Ohio
Laws, Part III, 3987, 4118-4120. The rates are similar in the current version of
R.C. 3317.02(E). These rates of adjustment vary from county to county and apply
equally to all districts within the county.      The cost-of-doing-business factors
assume that costs are lower in rural districts than in urban districts but, as the trial
court correctly concluded, that assumption is not always true.
                                  The “Charge-Off”
        {¶ 97} “ADM” stands for average daily membership, which is calculated
pursuant to R.C. 3317.03. See R.C. 3317.02(A). By multiplying the formula
amount, the cost-of-doing-business factor, and the ADM, the foundation formula
establishes a minimum amount of combined local and state per pupil aid per district.
A “charge off” is then subtracted from that figure. The charge-off is the total
taxable value of real and tangible personal property in the district times a certain
percentage. See R.C. 3317.022(A) (computation for state aid) and 3317.02(D)
(defining “total taxable value” as the sum of the amounts certified by the Tax
Commissioner under R.C. 3317.021[A][1] and [2]). At the time this case was filed,
total assessed value was multiplied by .02 (i.e., twenty mills times total assessed
valuation) to produce the applicable charge-off. 144 Ohio Laws, Part III, 3987,
4122.   During the pendency of the litigation, the twenty-mill multiplier was
increased to 20.5 mills (Am.Sub.H.B. No. 152, Section 36.12, 145 Ohio Laws, Part




                                          37
                               SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




III, 4432-4433) and was raised thereafter.        Currently, total taxable value is
multiplied by .023 for purposes of calculating the charge-off. R.C. 3317.022.
Subtracting the applicable charge-off results in a figure constituting the amount for
basic state aid for the district in question.
            Disadvantaged Pupil Impact Aid and Categorical Programs
        {¶ 98} In addition to the formula amount, school districts with children
whose families collect Aid to Dependent Children (“ADC”) receive what is called
“Disadvantaged Pupil Impact Aid” or “DPIA.” Am.Sub.H.B. No. 298, Section
59.02, 144 Ohio Laws, Part III, 4556-4557. This funding is calculated pursuant to
R.C. 3317.023 and consists of flat distributions (distributions that are not equalized)
based on ADM. Pursuant to R.C. 3317.022 and 3317.023, the aid to be provided
to a local district comprises the amount the district is entitled to receive under the
foundation formula plus the amount of DPIA.                The state also provides
appropriations to school districts for categorical programming such as vocational
and special education. R.C. 3317.024. There is essentially no equalization for
funding of categorical programs, so that districts receive categorical aid without
regard to school district wealth. According to the testimony of Oliver Ocasek, the
President of the State Board of Education at the time of trial, the flat distributions
for categorical aid represent a major flaw in the system of school funding and
reduce the equalization effect of the foundation formula. Ocasek testified that the
“main categoricals,” such as special education, vocational education, and DPIA,
have “never been fully funded.”           Rather, funding for those categories is
accomplished by essentially siphoning funds that would otherwise be available for
distribution under the foundation formula. In the words of Mr. Ocasek: “[A]s you
take a pot of money and you deduct from that these fine categorical programs and
for [DPIA], you, therefore, are siphoning away from the total pot of funds, which I
think are basic, and the more categorical money we give, the less equalization




                                            38
                                 January Term, 1997




money we have. That simple. I don’t think you need to be a professor of school
finance to say that.”
                                 Guarantee Provisions
       {¶ 99} The School Foundation Program contains certain guarantee
provisions to ensure that a school district receives the greater of the program
amount or the guarantee amount. See R.C. 3317.04 and 3317.0212. Thus, some
districts receive guarantee payments from the state under the School Foundation
Program rather than payments calculated pursuant to the foundation formula
described above.         Oliver Ocasek testified that the guarantee provisions
disproportionately benefit the wealthier districts, compromise the equalization
effect of the School Foundation Program, and represent a major defect in Ohio’s
system of school funding.
                        Am.Sub.H.B. No. 920 and Tax Reductions
       {¶ 100} School districts are required to levy twenty mills for current
operating expenses in order to participate in the School Foundation Program. See
R.C. 3317.01(A). The twenty mills comprise both “inside” and “outside” mills.
Inside mills are levied without approval of the electorate. Unvoted property taxes
are limited to ten mills, with the ten mills spread among the various taxing units.
See Section 2, Article XII of the Ohio Constitution and R.C. 5705.02. An average
local school district in Ohio manages to raise revenue from approximately 4.6 of
the ten available inside mills. Theoretically, a school district can raise an unlimited
amount of outside millage, with the only limitation being that outside millage must
be approved by the electorate. R.C. 5705.07.
       {¶ 101} For property tax purposes, real property in Ohio is divided into two
classifications: Class I property, consisting of residential and agricultural property,
and Class II property, consisting of all other real property, including commercial,
industrial, public utility and mineral. See R.C. 5713.041; Section 2a, Article XII,
Ohio Constitution.




                                          39
                              SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




          {¶ 102} Complicating the system of school funding in Ohio is the effect of
certain tax reduction factors originally introduced into law with the General
Assembly’s enactment of Am.Sub.H.B. No. 920 (136 Ohio Laws, Part II, 3182,
3194). H.B. 920 was enacted by the General Assembly as a tax reduction measure.
The provisions of law enacted by the General Assembly in H.B. 920 have
themselves been amended on several occasions since 1976. A product of these
various amendments is the current version of R.C. 319.301, which is very similar
to the version of that statute in existence at the time this case was commenced.
          {¶ 103} As pointed out by the majority, the purpose of R.C. 319.301 (like
the predecessor versions of that statute, including the version of R.C. 319.301
introduced into law by H.B. 920) is to limit the effect of inflation in property values
on growth of real property tax revenues. These R.C. 319.301 tax reduction factors
are applied when property values increase due to reappraisal or update. Pursuant
to R.C. 319.301(A)(2), inside millage is not subject to tax reduction factors.
Additionally, R.C. 319.301 provides that tax reduction factors do not apply to new
construction growth or tangible personal property. The effect of R.C. 319.301 is
that a school district will receive the same revenue from voted tax levies after
reappraisal as it did before reappraisal, notwithstanding that real property valuation
in the district has increased through inflation since the time of the initial tax levy.
Thus, revenue derived from effective outside mills essentially remains frozen in
time—it does not increase through the life of the levy. As a direct result of the tax
reduction measures first introduced by H.B. 920, local revenues cannot keep pace
with inflation. To keep abreast of costs, many school districts have been required
to propose additional tax levies. However, most of these additional tax levies have
failed.
          {¶ 104} Since R.C. 319.301 tax reduction factors do not apply to new
construction growth, see R.C. 319.301(B)(2)(a), (b) and (D)(1), school districts
with new construction growth enjoy additional revenue from an increase in




                                          40
                                January Term, 1997




valuation, while districts with growth attributable solely to inflation do not.
Moreover, R.C. 319.301 sets a floor of effective tax rate reductions at twenty mills
for each class of real property. School districts that have reached the twenty-mill
floor of reductions do not have their effective rates reduced further.            R.C.
319.301(A)(2). Consequently, even if all other things are considered equal, school
districts with increases in real property valuation receive differing amounts of local
tax levy revenue depending on whether the district has reached the twenty-mill
floor.
         {¶ 105} Suffice it to say that the effects of tax reduction factors are
complicated, including the effects of “phantom revenue” discussed in the majority
opinion.    The effects are varied and uneven among Ohio’s school districts,
depending on the amount of real versus tangible personal property, the amount of
inside mills a district has, the existence and extent of new construction growth,
whether the district is at or close to the twenty-mill floor in either class of real
property, and the extent of increases in real property valuation.
                             School District Borrowing
         {¶ 106} To supplement their budgets, school districts have been forced at
an increasing and alarming rate to borrow heavily against future expected revenue
receipts. Under the so-called spending reserve loan program, school districts are
permitted to borrow against a subsequent year’s revenue with approval of the
Superintendent of Public Instruction. See R.C. 133.301. There is a statutory
maximum amount that can be borrowed by a school district under the spending
reserve program, but the Superintendent of Public Instruction may permit excess
borrowing. Id. Obviously, where a school district borrows against a subsequent
year’s tax receipts, the district takes away resources for operations for the next
fiscal year. Thus, as the trial court found, “[a] school district can get into a spiral
where it is continually borrowing and paying back the following year. A school
district, therefore, is always taking away from the future. Any time a school district




                                          41
                                  SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




does such borrowing into the future, it robs future generations of children.” For
some school districts, borrowing has become a way of life, leading to the proverbial
spiral of debt.
         {¶ 107} School districts may also borrow from commercial lenders
pursuant to R.C. 3313.483 et seq., the emergency school assistance loan program.
However, school districts are required to borrow under the spending reserve loan
program as a condition precedent to participating in the emergency school
assistance loan program. See R.C. 3313.483(B). Pursuant to R.C. 3313.483(A),
school districts may determine by resolution that they are unable to remain open
for instruction on all days set forth in the adopted school calendar and are unable to
pay their expenses. Such a determination may also be made by the Superintendent
of Public Instruction pursuant to R.C. 3313.489. In either event, the auditor of
state12 must determine whether such a condition exists. If the auditor finds that the
board of education has attempted to avail itself of all revenue sources available, the
auditor must certify that finding to the Superintendent of Public Instruction and the
State Board of Education and must also certify the amount of operating deficit the
district will have at the end of the fiscal year. R.C. 3313.483(B). A school district
that has been certified as having a projected operating deficit must apply for an
ordinary commercial loan from a commercial lender or underwriter.                              R.C.
3313.483(D). If the application is rejected, the school district must submit to the
Superintendent of Public Instruction a plan for reducing the district’s budget and

12. It is interesting to note that a news article in the Athens News of Wednesday, November 27,
1996, entitled “State Auditor: School equity, an idea whose time has come” stated that:
          “An equity lawsuit filed on behalf of the Perry County schools—and a statewide coalition
of public schools—is currently being considered by the Ohio Supreme Court, whose decision could
pave the way for a major change in education funding.
          “Petro said he believes the Supreme Court will overturn an earlier appellate court decision
in the case, and will rule that Ohio’s school funding method violates the state constitution.
          “‘And frankly, I think it’s time to do that,’ he added.”
          The auditor, a former member of the General Assembly, is faced in his official capacity
with having to frequently deal with financially struggling school districts. I find his candor
refreshing.




                                                 42
                                January Term, 1997




must then apply for a loan from a commercial bank, underwriter or other
prospective lender. R.C. 3313.483(E)(1). The superintendent is required to review
each budget reduction plan. The plan must include a repayment schedule in
amounts sufficient to permit repayment of the principal amount of the emergency
assistance loan, but apparently does not require reductions sufficient in amount to
pay the interest on the emergency loan or to repay the principal and interest on any
spending reserve loan. Thus, as the trial court found, for most school districts with
outstanding emergency assistance loans, subsequent borrowing under the spending
reserve loan program will be required.
       {¶ 108} The superintendent routinely recommends controlling board
approval of an emergency school assistance loan for a school district that has
completed the application process and has a certified projected shortfall of
operating revenue. If a school district receives controlling board approval, the
district may obtain the loan from a commercial lending institution. See R.C.
3313.483(E). Pursuant to R.C. 3313.483(E)(3), the loan is repaid by diverting
funds otherwise available to the school district under the School Foundation
Program to the commercial lender for repayment of the loan. R.C. 3313.483(E)(3)
also provides that “[n]o note or other obligation of the board of education under the
loan constitutes an obligation nor a debt or a pledge of the faith, credit, or taxing
power of the state, and the holder or owner of such note or obligation has no right
to have taxes levied by the general assembly for the payment of such note or
obligation, and such note or obligation shall contain a statement to that effect.”
       {¶ 109} Effective December 22, 1992, if a district receives an R.C.
3313.483 emergency loan of more than seven percent of the district’s general fund
expenditures and has already received an emergency loan under R.C. 3313.483
within the last five years, the district is subject to state supervision. See R.C.
3313.488 and 3313.4810. The State Board of Education may also subject a district
to state supervision pursuant to R.C. 3313.487. School districts subject to state




                                         43
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




supervision are prohibited from making any expenditure of money, any
employment, purchase or rental contract, giving any order involving the
expenditure of money, or increasing any wage or salary schedule without written
approval of the Superintendent of Public Instruction. R.C. 3313.488. The so-called
receivership school districts (certain heavily indebted districts that have been
subjected to the provisions of R.C. 3313.488) include school districts from large
urban areas in Ohio as well as property-poor rural school districts. Twenty-five
school districts were receivership districts as of December 23, 1992.
                              Public School Buildings
       {¶ 110} The School Foundation Program contains no express provision for
the construction and maintenance of Ohio’s public school facilities. Rather, the
construction of public elementary and secondary schools in Ohio is primarily
financed through the issuance and sale of school district bonds upon approval of
the electors in the district. The bonds are repaid with the proceeds of property taxes
levied on the taxable property of the school district for that purpose. With stated
exceptions, districts are limited by law to a maximum bonded indebtedness of nine
percent of the district’s total property valuation. See R.C. 133.06(B). This amount
is exclusive of, among other things, any emergency school assistance loan. R.C.
133.06(D)(4). However, “special needs” districts may apply to the Superintendent
of Public Instruction for permission to exceed the nine-percent limitation. R.C.
133.06(E). A district may qualify as a special-needs district if the superintendent
finds that (1) the district does not have sufficient additional funds from state or
federal sources to meet projected needs, and (2) the projection of the district’s
potential average growth of tax valuation during the next five years indicates a
likelihood of potential average growth of at least three percent per year. Id.
       {¶ 111} R.C. Chapter 3318, the Classroom Facilities Act, is essentially a
loan program for the construction of public school facilities. Specifically, R.C.
Chapter 3318 provides a means by which qualifying school districts may




                                         44
                                 January Term, 1997




“purchase” classroom facilities from the state. See R.C. 3318.02. The process of
obtaining state assistance under the Classroom Facilities Act for construction of
public school facilities is extremely complicated. However, in general terms, this
assistance is contingent on, among other things, the existence of adequate state
funds, the approval of a school district’s proposed project, the passage of a
proposition by the electors in the district authorizing the district to issue bonds in
an amount sufficient to bring the district to a required level of net indebtedness and
authorizing a local tax levy for the purpose of paying the cost of the purchase from
the state, and the execution of a written agreement between the State Board of
Education and the local school district. See R.C. 3318.01 through 3318.08. Based
upon the evidence at trial and the stipulations of the parties, the trial court made the
following relevant findings of fact concerning the Classroom Facilities Act:
        “In order to participate in Classroom Facilities Act funds, a district must be
included on a ‘list’ of eligible districts. Lists are only created at such time as funds
are available.   After reviewing the applicants, the Department of Education
conducts a statewide survey to determine those districts most in need of additional
facilities.
        “Approval for participation for Classroom Facilities Act funding involves
an inspection by the Ohio Department of Education officials and a determination
of the number and percent of inadequately-housed pupils, as well as a prioritization
of school district applicants based on the percentage of inadequately-housed pupils
that need to be housed with state money.
        “From 1976 to the present time, there have been three lists of districts
eligible for Classroom Facilities Act funding; the initial list was prepared prior to
1976 when Dr. Phillis became Assistant Superintendent of Public Instruction. A
second list was prepared in 1984 and a subsequent list in 1989. The 1989 list was
revised with one additional district being included in 1991.




                                          45
                              SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




        “Plaintiffs’ Exhibit 378 is a list of the 44 school districts who have been
approved for classroom facilities assistance pursuant to the provisions of Chapter
3318 of the Ohio Revised Code. The list was adopted by the State Board of
Education on December 20, 1989, and updated in 1991. The list describes a total
of over $114,000,000 [sic, $414,000,000 according to the exhibit and the
stipulations of the parties] in value of approved facilities needs. Of these school
districts, 18 have been approved for school building assistance, passed the requisite
levies, and funds have been made available for school construction. Twenty-six
(26) school districts remain on the approved building list, for which no funds have
been appropriated by the Ohio General Assembly.
        “All the pupils identified as ‘improperly housed’ in 1989 in districts that
have not received Classroom Facilities Act assistance continue to be improperly
housed unless the school district has provided facilities without state assistance.
        “* * *
        “Because any school district beyond [those listed in Plaintiffs’ Exhibit 378]
[is] at least seven to nine years down the road before help will be available to them
(assuming a level of appropriations by the General Assembly), the Division of
School Building Assistance of the Ohio Department of Education accepts letters of
intent from school districts, indicating their interest [in being] placed upon the
approved school building assistance list. Stipulation Exhibit 52 lists those 50
school districts who have filed letters of intent with the building assistance office,
including Plaintiff Northern Local School District.
        “It is the intent of the State Board of Education to take care of all 44 districts
set forth on the approved building assistance list, Plaintiffs’ Exhibit 378, before the
State moves on to any more districts. These districts must pass levies and their
projects must be completed before any new schools will make it on to the approved
buildings list.




                                           46
                                January Term, 1997




        “Classroom Facilities Act funds do not include funds for the equipment or
operation of schools, but are limited to provision of school facilities only. [See
R.C. 3318.01(B).]
        “The state has final approval in the design of facilities funded with
Classroom Facilities Act funds. [R.C. 3318.091.]” (Citations to evidence omitted.)
        {¶ 112} The parties have stipulated that as of July 1993, only $2,006,176.83
was available from the state to fund approved classroom facilities projects, not
including, among other things, fiscal year 1994 and 1995 budgeted appropriations.
In 1990, the Ohio Department of Education conducted a comprehensive survey of
Ohio’s public school facilities. The survey identified approximately $10.2 billion
in needs for repairs and improvements for Ohio’s public school facilities. The trial
court reviewed the Classroom Facilities Act (R.C. Chapter 3318) and found the
program to be seriously underfunded. A review of the record can lead to no other
conclusion.
                 The 1990 Ohio Public Schools Facilities Survey
        {¶ 113} In 1989 and 1990, the Ohio Department of Education, at the
direction of the General Assembly, conducted a statewide survey of Ohio’s public
school buildings. The survey cost approximately $3.5 million and involved an on-
site review of each public school building in the state that housed pupils. The
Facilities Survey was conducted by architects. There is no dispute that the survey
represents a fair and accurate report of the conditions of Ohio’s schools as of 1990.
The results of the survey were published and submitted to the General Assembly.
The survey is contained in the record as Plaintiffs’ Exhibit 14 and identified $10.2
billion in needed improvements for Ohio’s public elementary and secondary school
facilities.
        {¶ 114} The Facilities Survey identified the need for over $153 million to
make public school buildings accessible to the handicapped.           However, the
evidence demonstrates that given the requirements of the Americans with




                                         47
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




Disabilities Act (“ADA”), Section 12101 et seq., Title 42, U.S.Code, the $153
million in needs identified by the survey represents a substantial underestimation
of the true costs involved in complying with applicable federal mandates. The
survey determined that only about twenty percent of existing public school
buildings in Ohio are satisfactory in terms of accessibility to the handicapped. The
state of Ohio provided grants for architectural barrier abatement in fiscal year 1990
and 1991. Between that time and the time of trial, the General Assembly had
provided no additional appropriations for barrier abatement in public schools. The
amounts appropriated in 1990-1991 totaled $3.38 million. School districts were
permitted to apply for a maximum of three grants for architectural barrier
abatement. The grants were doled out on a first-come, first-served basis, without
regard to the relative wealth of the districts applying for grant money. Seventy-six
school districts that applied for grants received none. As of the time of trial, there
were no funds available from the state or federal government to help pay for making
public school buildings accessible as required by the ADA.
       {¶ 115} The Facilities Survey identified over $328 million in funds needed
for the management of asbestos hazards in public school buildings. Funds are
available to public school districts on the federal level for asbestos abatement. See,
generally, Section 4011 et seq., Title 20, U.S.Code. However, federal funds are
scarce. In this regard, the trial court made the following relevant findings of fact.
In 1993, school districts in Ohio submitted $120 million in requests for funds to
abate “Class 1” asbestos hazards to conform to the federal Asbestos Hazard
Emergency Response Act, Section 2641 et seq., Title 15, U.S.Code. Only twenty-
nine school districts received a total of $14.7 million in grants and loans for
abatement of the Class 1 asbestos hazards. For fiscal year 1990, approximately $18
million was appropriated by the General Assembly for asbestos abatement in the
public schools. The funds were available on a first-come, first-served basis. More
than two hundred forty school districts submitted applications totaling $140 million




                                         48
                                 January Term, 1997




in requests for the $18 million in available funds. Only sixty-three districts received
any funding. For fiscal year 1991, thirty-four districts received asbestos abatement
grants while more than one hundred fifty-eight districts that had applied for grants
received none. Between 1991 and the date of trial, no further state funds were
available for asbestos abatement. Aside from the scarce federal funds, no money
was available to the districts for asbestos abatement other than local school district
revenue.
        {¶ 116} Each of the appellant school districts was determined by the
Department of Education to have greater facilities needs than could be paid for by
the districts on a local level, even if the districts had no other indebtedness and even
if the districts were capable of passing local bond issues to the maximum amount
permitted by law. The trial court found that in addition to the appellant school
districts, sixty-one percent of the school districts in Ohio are unable to meet the
amount of their identified facilities needs.
                                           B
                  The Inadequacy and Inequity of School Funding
        {¶ 117} The operation of the School Foundation Program, the emphasis of
Ohio’s school funding system on local property tax, the effects of the R.C. 319.301
tax reduction requirements, mandated school district borrowing through the
spending reserve and emergency school assistance programs, imposition of state
and federal unfunded mandates, and the inability or unwillingness of the General
Assembly to provide sufficient funding for, among other things, the construction
and necessary maintenance of school facilities have all combined to create a severe
negative impact on Ohio’s public schools. A review of the trial court’s findings
makes clear the various causes of the deplorable conditions in which some of
Ohio’s public school students are educated, as well as the nature and extent of such
conditions. The trial court’s findings of fact in this case are four hundred forty-
eight pages in length and document the inequities and fundamental weaknesses of




                                          49
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




Ohio’s system of school funding. None of the findings are challenged by the parties
to this appeal. For the most part, the trial court’s findings of fact were premised on
the joint stipulations of the parties. Some of the trial court’s findings and the
evidence upon which the findings were based may be summarized as follows.
       •       The formula amount provided through the School Foundation
Program does not even come close to the average expenditure per pupil in Ohio,
and the average per-pupil expenditure is outpacing the formula amount at an
increasing rate. The fact that the formula amount does not reflect the true costs of
education represents a substantial weakness in Ohio’s system of school funding.
       •       For fiscal years 1994 and 1995, the State Board of Education
requested a $1.9 billion increase in funding. The General Assembly appropriated
only $625 million in additional funds. The amounts requested by the State Board
of Education and denied by the General Assembly were considered to be necessary
for the education of Ohio’s public school students.
       •       Categorical program allocations to school districts through the
School Foundation Program are not equalized. Wealthy districts receive the same
unit funding as poor districts for, among other things, vocational and special
education.   Further, the amounts received for categorical programs such as
vocational and special education are less than the actual costs of the programs, with
poor school districts having less ability to make up the difference between the state
funding provided and the actual program costs.
       •       The guarantee provisions of the School Foundation Program
diminish the equalization effects of the foundation program. For fiscal year 1993,
over one-third of all school districts in Ohio received payments under guarantee
provisions as opposed to the formula for state basic aid. A majority of the payments
under the guarantee provisions go to the wealthier districts. The operation of the
guarantee provisions of the School Foundation Program is considered by the State




                                         50
                                 January Term, 1997




Board of Education to be a fundamental weakness in the way Ohio funds its
schools.
        •       The formula for determining Disadvantaged Pupil Impact Aid
(“DPIA”) does not accurately reflect the true costs of educating disadvantaged
pupils in high concentrations of poverty. There is no predictability to the DPIA
system of funding, and predictability in funding is an important aspect of financial
management.
        •       The amount of charge-off in the foundation formula does not
accurately measure the ability of school districts to pay their local share of the basic
program.
        •       The cost-of-doing-business factors in the foundation formula apply
equally to all school districts within a county regardless of the true cost of
operations in the individual districts. The factors assume that costs are lower in
rural districts as opposed to urban districts, but many costs associated with running
a school district are not affected by the district’s location in the state. Additionally,
the cost-of-doing-business factors do not fully reflect differences in costs associated
with school district operations and do not adequately account for differences in
costs within counties.
        •       The tax reduction factors of R.C. 319.301 severely limit growth of
local property tax revenues.       Consequently, school districts must repeatedly
propose local tax levies to raise necessary funds. These increased numbers of
proposals have met with increasing failure.
        •       R.C. 319.301 and the effects of phantom revenue in the state aid
calculation deprive school districts of necessary funding. Phantom revenue occurs
where a school district has inflationary growth in real property valuation, receives
no additional local tax receipts commensurate with the increased valuations, and




                                           51
                                SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




receives less in state basic aid since the increased valuations increase the amount
of the district’s charge-off.
        •       But for tax reduction factors, a total of more than $1.176 billion in
additional revenues would have been available for Ohio’s public schools in 1990
alone. As a result of the tax reduction factors, school districts lost over $1.472
billion in real property tax revenue in fiscal year 1992. In fiscal year 1992, tax
reduction factors reduced property taxes statewide to the tune of 26.12 percent.
        •       Ohio’s system of school funding places so much of the burden for
raising required revenues on the backs of the local school districts that it invites
disparities among the districts. There is a strong correlation in Ohio between
assessed property valuation per pupil and total expenditures per pupil. The top two
hundred school districts in Ohio (ranked by assessed value per pupil) spend over
$1,000 more per pupil per year than the bottom two hundred school districts. The
result is that there are rich and poor school districts in Ohio. Specifically, there are
districts in which per-pupil revenue and expenditure levels far exceed the per-pupil
revenue and expenditure levels of other (less fortunate) schools.
        •       The disparities in school district revenues and expenditures are not
due to the lack of tax effort of the districts or the voters in the districts. The trial
court found that “[f]iscal effort between the top and bottom deciles of assessed
valuation per pupil indicates that although there is a revenue and expenditure
disparity, the level of effort between the rich and poor is virtually uniform.” The
trial court also found that “[t]aking into account both the value of assessed property
and the adjusted gross income as combined measures of ability to pay taxes, the
poorest 200 school districts in Ohio actually exerted a greater level of tax effort in
1990 than the wealthiest 200 school districts.”
        •       Because one mill of local tax effort raises so little in districts with
low assessed valuation, those districts have extreme difficulties in passing effective




                                          52
                                January Term, 1997




millage since (1) voters can ill afford to pay the increased tax, and (2) the benefits
to the school district are minimal since property valuation is low. The extent of
disparities in funds available to Ohio’s school districts grew over the decade of the
1980s and continues to grow.
         •     According to the testimony and the trial court’s findings, Ohio is
among the states with the greatest disparities in expenditures per pupil. In 1990,
Ohio ranked forty-eighth out of the fifty states in the extent of disparity of revenue
and expenditure per pupil.
         •     Predictability and reliability of income are extremely important
aspects of school finance. However, the system of school funding in Ohio does not
provide stability of income to local school districts and adversely affects the ability
of the districts to properly manage the operation of the public schools.
         •     The trial court found that one of the driving forces behind the
financial disparities in Ohio’s system of school finance is the differences in Class
II real property valuation among the various districts. The growth in inequity in
the distribution of Class II property (property other than residential/agricultural)
among the districts grew from 1981 through 1990 at a far greater rate than the
growth in inequity in Class I (residential/agricultural) real property.
         •     There is little industry in the Dawson-Bryant School District. Thus,
most of the burden of local taxation is placed directly on the backs of the residents
of the district. Average income is very low compared to other districts within the
state.   The residents of the Dawson-Bryant School District have little or no
discretionary income with which to pay additional taxes. Twenty-five percent of
the district’s students are ADC recipients and a great percentage of the students
qualify for free or reduced-price lunch programs.
         •     With respect to the Lima City School District, the trial court found
that “[p]eople who move into [this] district tend to be people who are moving to




                                          53
                              SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




take advantage of low income housing. As a result, the individuals who attend the
Lima City Schools tend to be poor.” The trial court further found that “[t]he Lima
City School District has not proposed the passage of additional tax levies to its
voters because it has one of the lowest tax bases and one of the lowest per capita
incomes of any school district in the State of Ohio, such that the tax payers of the
District are already assuming a significant burden. * * * Thus, the existing tax
burden, combined with an ever increasing population living below the poverty line
makes the prospect of passage of an additional tax levy unlikely.”
        •       Northern Local School District has experienced rapid increases in
enrollment as a consequence of an increase in the concentration of mobile homes.
These homes are taxed at lower rates than permanent structures, and the influx of
mobile homes has diminished the district’s tax receipts. Given the lower tax rate,
an influx of mobile homes generally harms a district by bringing in many new
students without adequate corresponding tax revenue. Residents moving into the
district tend to be poor and the ability of the district’s residents to pay additional
taxes has decreased over time.
        •       The economic situation in the Southern Local School District is
grim. Jobs are scarce and large coal companies have either reduced or ceased
operations in the district. Additionally, the federal government has purchased large
tracts of land in the district and does not pay any taxes on the property.
        •       The economy of Youngstown has hurt the Youngstown City School
District. The combination of steel mill closings and tax abatements to draw new
businesses has had a devastating impact on the future viability of the Youngstown
city schools. With respect to this district, the trial court made the following relevant
findings:
        “The Select Committee to Review and Study Ohio’s Education System
heard testimony from the Superintendent of the Youngstown City Schools that the




                                          54
                                January Term, 1997




Youngstown-Mahoning Valley area lost 40,000 jobs between 1977 and 1987,
resulting in income loss to employee wage earners and loss of personal tangible
property value throughout the area.
       “The plant closings in Youngstown have made it very difficult for the
school system to function. The closings have caused tremendous unemployment,
increased numbers of people on ADC, increased numbers of students on free or
reduced price lunches, increased numbers of single-parent families, increased
latchkey situations, increased numbers of neglected children, and many people are
functioning on a survival basis with food, clothing, and shelter needs.
       “The total value of abated property in the Youngstown City School District
grew from $4,073,310 in [1988] to $16,928,920 in 1992. Property in the district,
exempt from taxation, was valued at $159,023,950 in 1992.
       “In the Youngstown City School District, between tax year 1978 and 1987,
the total assessed property value fell from slightly over $1 billion to $606 million,
measured in 1990 dollars. By the 1990 tax year, total assessed value had fallen to
$547 million.
       “In Plaintiff Youngstown City School District, 1 mill of taxes raised about
$62 for each student in 1979, $41 in 1987, and only $37 in 1990.
       “The average daily membership (ADM) of the Youngstown City Schools
has declined by about 1,866 students from 1982 to 1992. * * *” (Citations to
evidence omitted.)
       •        Property-poor school districts and others have been forced to borrow
funds to meet their needs. The trend in borrowing has grown, with a growing
number of school districts entering into receivership/state supervision. For some
school districts, borrowing under the state’s loan programs has become a way of
life. The majority of these districts have low property valuation and have been
unsuccessful in passing additional tax levy millage on more than one occasion. The
magnitude of borrowing under the loan programs has become staggering, and most




                                         55
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




districts have very little chance of escaping from this vicious circle of mortgaging
the future of Ohio’s public school students.
       •       As a condition to receiving emergency school assistance loans,
school districts must borrow under the spending reserve loan program and must
drastically cut expenditures. Cutting expenditures in anticipation of having to
borrow funds is common financial practice.          Thus, expenditure reduction is
common among financially distressed school districts -- even those that have not
entered into the emergency school assistance loan program.
       •       School district plans for expenditure reductions submitted with
applications for emergency school assistance loans normally include, as the first
order of business, cuts in school administrators, classroom teachers and support
personnel. The next largest area of expenditure reduction comprises materials,
supplies and textbooks. Next are early retirement incentives, delay in the purchase
of school buses, and cuts in maintenance costs.          However, cuts in textbook
purchases and maintenance usually occur long before a district applies for an
emergency assistance loan. As a result of the cuts that must be made to receive a
loan, educational programs are less effective. Reduction of classroom teachers,
textbooks and supplies adversely affects educational opportunity.
       •       At the time the trial court issued its decision in this matter, at least
four of the “big eight” city school districts in Ohio had been approved for an
emergency school assistance loan. These districts were the Youngstown, Akron,
Cleveland and Cincinnati city school districts. The Southern Local School District
borrowed money through the emergency assistance loan program in fiscal year
1992 and had instituted many cuts in staff, supplies and materials. These cuts had
devastating consequences in the district, including a large number of students not
passing on to higher grade levels due, at least in part, to the lack of available staff
and the lack of sufficient teaching materials. If Southern Local needs to borrow




                                          56
                                January Term, 1997




additional moneys under the emergency assistance loan program, there is very little
(if anything) the district could cut from its bare-bones budget for the required
expenditure reduction plan. The trial court found that as of the time of trial,
appellant Northern Local School District was the only district in Perry County not
to receive an emergency school assistance loan. However, while Northern Local
was not a loan fund district, it was considered a “borderline” school district.
       •       Budget cuts and lack of funding have deprived the students in the
appellant school districts of the educational opportunities available to other public
school students in Ohio. The trial court found and the evidence confirms that
students in the appellant school districts are not being provided with adequate
textbooks, a sufficient number of teachers and support personnel, an acceptable
level of guidance counseling and necessary supervision, sufficient laboratory
equipment, opportunities for advanced placement, acceptable levels of vocational
training, and a host of other resources, items and materials necessary to ensure the
students a high quality education.
       •       The appellant school districts have lost or are in the process of losing
experienced teachers to districts that are able to pay higher salaries. Property-poor
districts, including some of the appellant school districts, have been required to hire
less experienced school teachers because they can be paid less. Poorer school
districts, including some of the appellant school districts, have had great difficulty
hiring necessary personnel. The trial court found that the salary schedule for
Dawson-Bryant was inadequate to attract certificated teachers and was not
competitive with the pay scales of other districts within the county or the state.
Thus, Dawson-Bryant was losing good teachers to neighboring school districts and
was in jeopardy of losing more for the same reason. The Lima City School
District’s average teacher salary was lower than all the other districts of its type in
the state. Northern Local has lost teachers and administrators due to a lack of
competitive salaries. The district has lost other teachers and support personnel as




                                          57
                            SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




a result of budgetary reductions. Northern Local cannot hire experienced teachers
because of a lack of funding.       Rather, the district has been forced to hire
inexperienced teachers whose salaries are lower. The average teacher salary for the
Southern Local School District is one of the lowest in the state. For average
teacher’s salary, Southern Local ranks five hundred fifty-seventh in the state. The
district has trouble recruiting teachers in certain specialized areas.          The
Youngstown City School District generally hires inexperienced teachers due to
budgetary constraints. The district’s salary schedule is not adequate to draw needed
teachers and teachers with certain training into the community. Staff development
and in-service teacher training for the appellant school districts and others have
been woefully inadequate.
       •       The curricula in the appellant school districts are severely limited.
For example, at the Dawson-Bryant High School, there was only one science lab,
which, as of February 1993, was in a general state of disrepair. Dawson-Bryant has
been unable to implement model math and language arts curricula due to a lack of
necessary resources and materials. Similar problems, to a greater or lesser degree,
were being experienced by each of the appellant school districts.
       •       Generally, reductions by a school district in the number of teachers,
textbooks, materials and supplies directly affect the educational opportunity
available to students. At the time of trial, the appellant school districts were
financially unable to purchase required textbooks, and were using texts with
missing pages and with ancient copyright dates. For some classes, there were no
textbooks at all. There was evidence as to the inadequacies of school libraries.
There were serious shortages of materials and supplies throughout the appellant
school districts. Lima City, Southern Local, and Youngstown school teachers often
spend a good amount of their own money to bring supplies to work. Teachers in
the Southern Local School District are issued one or two boxes of paper that must
last them the entire school year, and most teachers end up buying paper to bring to



                                        58
                                 January Term, 1997




work. Not only is paper rationed in the Southern Local School District, but paper
clips are rationed, time on the copier is rationed, and art supplies, chalk, and even
toilet paper are rationed. The paper shortage is so severe in the Southern Local
School District due to the lack of adequate funding that the district does not even
provide employees with paychecks in envelopes. Resources are so scarce that to
receive paychecks during the summer months, teachers must provide the district
with an envelope and stamp if they wish to receive their checks by mail -- otherwise,
the teachers must pick up their checks in person.
        •       None of the appellant school districts are financially able to keep up
with the technological training needs of the students in the districts, which makes
it highly unlikely that the children of the appellant school districts will be able to
meaningfully compete in the job market against those students from richer districts
who receive a sufficient level of technological training.
        •       The trial court found that as of October 26, 1993, approximately
seventeen thousand Ohio high school seniors had not passed all parts of the ninth
grade proficiency exam after having at least six opportunities to do so. The trial
court also found that, on the average, pupils in school districts having lower levels
of taxable property have lower passage rates on the test than pupils in districts with
higher levels. Moreover, the trial court determined on the basis of the information
available that “[p]upils from high socio-economic backgrounds have a greater
likelihood of passing the ninth grade proficiency tests. Those same pupils generally
attend schools that have greater levels of expenditure per pupil.” Additionally, the
trial court determined that the percentage of pupils passing all parts of the ninth
grade proficiency test from the appellant school districts is substantially less than
the passage rates for the wealthiest quintile of school districts in the state.
        •       As of the fall of 1993, thirty-two out of ninety-nine seniors in the
Dawson-Bryant Local School District had not passed all parts of the ninth grade




                                           59
                              SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




proficiency test. By contrast, only one out of one hundred high school seniors in
the Beachwood City School District near Cleveland (a school with a large per-pupil
expenditure) had not passed the ninth grade proficiency test. That one student,
however, had passed all but one part of the test. Further, that student had been
diagnosed as having severe learning problems. In the Lima City School District,
seventy-two out of two hundred sixty-eight seniors had not passed and were in
danger of not receiving a diploma. As of the time of trial, only fifty-three percent
of the juniors and thirty-seven percent of the sophomores had passed all parts of the
test. As of the fall of 1993, thirteen out of one hundred fifty-four seniors at Northern
Local had not passed all parts of the proficiency test. As with all of the appellant
school districts, the Northern Local School District does not have sufficient funds
to stop the high rate of failures. Those funds that are available for intervention are
expended, but that merely takes away opportunities from other students who are in
need of attention. As of the time of trial, sixteen out of seventy-nine seniors in the
Southern Local School District had not passed all parts of the ninth grade
proficiency test. As of November 1993, three hundred of seven hundred seventy-
three seniors in the Youngstown City School District had not passed all parts of the
test. The trial court found and the evidence suggests that the massive test failures
would result in an increased student dropout rate.          Most inmates in Ohio’s
correctional institutions lack a high school diploma. Obviously, the lack of a high
school diploma deprives individuals of a number of opportunities in life.
                                           C
                  Public School Buildings in the Plaintiff Districts
       {¶ 118} The evidence in this case and the trial court’s findings of fact
pertaining to the condition of the school buildings in the appellant school districts
and others provide compelling proof of the economic despair created by Ohio’s
system of school funding. Some of the trial court’s most disturbing findings




                                          60
                                January Term, 1997




relating to the condition of the facilities and the evidence upon which the findings
are based may be summarized as follows.
                                  Dawson-Bryant
       {¶ 119} At the time of trial, there were four school buildings in operation in
the Dawson-Bryant Local School District: Monitor Elementary, Deering
Elementary, the intermediate school building, and the Dawson-Bryant High School.
Dr. Lee R. McMurren, then superintendent of the Beachwood City Schools near
Cleveland, testified concerning a tour he had taken through the Dawson-Bryant
School District. According to McMurren, the materials used in the classrooms were
worn and outdated. He observed special education classes and testified that the
types of classrooms used to educate the students were a disgrace to the state of Ohio
and to all Americans.
       {¶ 120} At the time of trial, Monitor Elementary had no location for
breakfast or lunch programs, no appropriate location for art and music classes, and
no location for a physical education program. There were no nursing facilities in
the event a child became ill. The library was small and dark, and could house only
about ten children at a time, with no room for the children to sit down and browse
through books. The building was not accessible to the handicapped. The electrical
wiring in the building limited the use of technology. At Monitor, if more than three
teachers plugged in fans at the same time, the breaker switch would kick off because
the wiring cannot handle the electrical current.
       {¶ 121} Deering Elementary was not accessible to the handicapped.
Handicapped students had to be carried to certain locations in the building. There
were no nursing facilities at Deering. Evaluations for identifying and placing
handicapped students were performed in a former closet with one light bulb
hanging from the ceiling and no heating or ventilation. Part of the assessment
required evaluation of fine motor activities which were extremely difficult to
perform in an unheated closet in the depth of winter. The trial court found and the




                                         61
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




evidence indicates that from August 23, 1993 to August 30, 1993, the average
afternoon temperature in the Deering Elementary building was one hundred degrees
downstairs and one hundred fifteen degrees upstairs and in the cafeteria.
       {¶ 122} The intermediate school building was out of compliance with EPA
emissions standards. The coal heating system in the building was a health hazard.
Coal dust could be seen in the air within the building. The area used for a band
room was a former coal bin with no ventilation and no windows. There was no
kitchen or cafeteria in the building and no free breakfast program could be offered.
The building had no science laboratories and technology in the school was limited.
There was one shower room in the school, which was shared by boys and girls.
There was no art or music room. Special education class was held in a former
storage area. The Ohio Department of Education had informed Dawson-Bryant of
the need to move the special education classroom; however, there was no place to
move. From August 23, 1993 to August 30, 1993, the average temperature in the
building exceeded ninety-five degrees.
       {¶ 123} There was no band or music room at Dawson-Bryant High School.
The library was located in a modular building that was not readily accessible to
students. Water and gas stations in the science laboratory were not functional. Two
special education classes were held in former storage areas. The kitchen and
cafeteria were insufficient to serve the students’ needs. Classrooms were cramped
and noisy. The high school had coal-fired boilers which emitted hazardous coal
dust into the building. The only rooms in the entire building with hot water were
the home economics room, the cafeteria, and the locker room. None of the
restrooms had hot water.
       {¶ 124} In May 1993, the Dawson-Bryant Local School District was
successful in passing a bond issue that will allow the district to participate in the
public school building assistance program under the Classroom Facilities Act (R.C.
Chapter 3318). At the time of trial, the new facilities were expected to be completed




                                         62
                                 January Term, 1997




in 1995.    The district’s plans included closing Monitor Elementary and the
intermediate school buildings, making renovations and additions to Deering
Elementary to provide a centralized facility for kindergarten through fifth grade,
modifying and renovating the high school into a middle school facility, and building
a new high school. However, the trial court found that significant problems will
remain even after completion of the project due to the lack of sufficient funding.
                              Lima City School District
       {¶ 125} The trial court found that the Lima City School District cannot raise
enough money through the passage of a construction levy to meet its facility needs.
At the time of trial, the district operated sixteen school buildings that housed pupils,
i.e., eleven elementary school buildings, three middle schools, a high school and an
alternative high school.
       {¶ 126} Three of the elementary school buildings were built in the 1920s
and contained significant amounts of asbestos in the ceilings and piping. The
plumbing in the buildings was deteriorating and there was great need for updated
electrical service. To provide new electrical service would be extremely costly,
since running additional wiring through the floors or ceilings would disturb the
asbestos, resulting in substantial effort and expense to prevent friable asbestos from
escaping into the air. At the time of trial, only one of the eleven elementary schools
was accessible to the handicapped.
       {¶ 127} South Middle School in Lima is an ancient building. Testimony
established that its electrical problems are so bad that maintenance personnel have
to wear rubber gloves and rubber vests to work on the electrical panel. In the fall
of 1993, a portion of the exterior of the building collapsed onto a sidewalk.
Fortunately, there were no injuries to students who used the sidewalk to enter and
leave the building. Certain portions of the building that did not collapse are similar
in design to the portion of the building that did collapse. Thus, the building is in




                                          63
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




great need of repair. Lima operated a total of three middle schools, none of which
met ADA requirements for accessibility to the handicapped.
       {¶ 128} At the time of trial, Lima Senior High School had asbestos in every
room in the facility. The facility housed approximately one thousand four hundred
students. Testimony established that any structural work on the high school is
difficult because it disturbs the asbestos, resulting in substantial costs connected
with monitoring and encapsulation. As one extreme example of the problem, a
shop teacher at the high school removed a dust collection system in a room and
disturbed some friable asbestos, costing the district $15,000 to make the room safe
for students.
       {¶ 129} The trial court found that the Lima City School District is unable to
engage in any preventative maintenance of its school facilities and that it repairs its
facilities on an emergency-needs basis. Further, the court found that the district
needs only seven elementary schools as opposed to the eleven in operation, but that
the district is unable to reorganize elementary programs because to do so would
require a new larger school building which the district cannot afford.
                          Youngstown City School District
       {¶ 130} At the time of trial, many of the school buildings in the
Youngstown City School District were in a state of disarray with bad roofs,
overcrowded classrooms, and a host of other problems. Building maintenance was
performed on an emergency basis only. The 1990 Facilities Survey identified
approximately $67 million in needs for the Youngstown schools. Very few of these
needs had been addressed by the time of trial. All capital improvements had been
put on hold due to a lack of funds. Overcrowding and high student-to-teacher ratios
had become common in several of the school buildings. Asbestos removal and
architectural barrier abatement needs could not be met due to lack of funds. The
following findings of fact by the trial court sum up the state of affairs in many of




                                          64
                                 January Term, 1997




the Youngstown city schools, and provide a unique perspective on the educational
opportunities available to pupils in the Youngstown City School District:
        “The John White Elementary School building has a metal building addition
that * * * [i]n the summer * * * heats up during the day so the students can hardly
bear to be in their rooms, and in winter it stays so cold there is often frost on the
interior walls. The building also houses special education and remediation students
in a portable unit. The library * * * has been divided to create more classroom
space, so there is not sufficient library space. There is no computer lab[;] computers
are placed on carts for intervention classes.
        “* * *
        “The Lincoln Elementary School has some grades which are overcrowded,
computers on carts, and insufficient recreational space. The playground doubles as
a parking lot for staff and a shooting gallery for the neighborhood.
        “* * *
        “The Martin Luther King Elementary School is beginning to have extensive
roof leaks which the district has been unable to address due to lack of funds. The
building is not handicapped accessible. The Martin Luther King Elementary
building has security problems, and equipment has been stolen from the building.
        “Taft Elementary School is overcrowded, and the first grade classes in
1992-93 school year had 33, 34 and 35 students, respectively. Some parents
voluntarily agreed to allow the district to transport their students to other buildings
in the district just to get the first grade classes down to a 30 to 1 ratio. * * *
        “* * *
        “Volney Rogers Junior High School is the only junior high in the district
with a science lab. There are no science labs at the other junior high schools
because they are extremely expensive to install and the district cannot afford to use
the classroom space to put in science labs. At Youngstown, the first lab courses
are offered as a sophomore in high school.” (Citations to evidence omitted.)




                                           65
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




       {¶ 131} In all, the record is clear that the facilities in the Youngstown school
district are wholly inadequate to meet the district’s needs.
                          Southern Local School District
       {¶ 132} Recently, the Southern Local School District was successful in
obtaining funds under the Classroom Facilities Act together with the passage of the
necessary tax levy and bond issue to provide new school facilities in the district.
However, the need for the new facilities had existed since 1980. The Southern
Local School District had over eight hundred improperly housed students identified
in connection with its application for Classroom Facilities Act assistance. The trial
court’s findings concerning the state of the Southern Local schools prior to the
completion of the renovation project are nothing less than staggering, and the fact
that the schools were ever allowed to reach that point is simply outrageous. This
case was commenced in 1991. Some of the trial court’s findings concerning the
Southern Local schools as they existed up to and during the time this case was
litigated convincingly demonstrate how far some of Ohio’s districts have sunk
under the current system of school funding:
       “When Superintendent [Carol] Spangler was employed in August 1991,
elementary students were house[d] at New Straitsville Elementary, Corning
Elementary, and Moxahala Elementary; junior high students were housed at Miller
Junior High at Shawnee, and high school students were housed at Miller High
School. The New Straitsville and Shawnee buildings were built around 1915, with
Shawnee having some additions after that. Moxahala and Corning were both built
in the 1920s.
       “As a result of the lack of resources for comprehensive maintenance and
upkeep, all of the buildings, other than the high school, were in very poor condition
in 1991 when Ms. Spangler became Superintendent. The heating, electricity,
ventilation, plumbing, and sewage systems in the elementary and junior high
buildings needed comprehensive repair. The sewage system at New Straitsville




                                         66
                                January Term, 1997




Elementary would flood over State Route 93 on occasion. Incidents such as the
temperature in Moxahala’s gym being only 20 degrees were not uncommon. * * *
Asbestos was a primary concern in the elementary and junior high buildings. At
Shawnee, the major part of the building was constructed with asbestos in the lower
layer of the plaster. Because plaster was falling, some mornings the custodian and
principal at the Shawnee building would go into rooms and knock plaster off the
ceilings so that big chips would not fall on students during the day. * * * At
Shawnee, the roof leaked, the lighting was poor, the heating was inconsistent, and
there was no hot water in the bathrooms.
       “Louis Altier, President of the Southern Local Board of Education, testified
that he has farm animals that are housed better than students were housed in the
Shawnee building. Whereas his animals were dry and warm, that could not be said
about the students in the Shawnee building.
       “The district did not have the financial resources to completely replace
electrical systems and plumbing systems, to remove asbestos, and to perform the
comprehensive maintenance that was necessary to keep the buildings in a safe
condition.
       “* * *
       “Chris Thompson attended the New Straitsville Elementary for
kindergarten, for the two weeks he spent in 2nd grade before being advanced a
grade, and for 3rd grade (1984-85 and 1986-87). The building gave Christopher ‘a
dirty feeling.’ There was plaster falling off the walls and ceilings and cockroaches
had been seen crawling on the floor in the restrooms. Chris avoided using the
restrooms at all while at school; he waited the entire school day to use the bathroom
at home. The gymnasium floor was warped and it was so small that Chris found it
difficult to play some sports because students would run into the walls. * * * The
library was very small with inadequate book supplies and with outdated books.




                                         67
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




Following a storm, the roof leaked and a large piece of the ceiling fell onto the floor
and the library was closed for about two to three weeks. * * *
       “In the 4th through 6th grades, Chris Thompson attended the Corning
Elementary building (1987-88 and 1989-90). The building was very dirty, the
bathrooms had cockroaches and other creatures crawling on the floors, possibly
silverfish. A leaking roof was a real problem. In math class, water dripped like a
waterfall from the ceiling into a bucket after rains. Sometimes, the students had to
ask the teacher to be moved because the water was splashing on them. After a hard
rain the night before, the constant drip into the bucket was very annoying. The
library at Corning was very small with an inadequate supply of books and with
outdated books. The science room was next to the furnace room, which made the
science room very noisy, and it was hard for the students to concentrate or to hear
the teacher talk. Plaster was falling off the walls at the Corning building.
       “Chris Thompson attended the Shawnee building for the 1st grade (1985-
86) and for the 7th and 8th grades (1990-91 to 1991-92). In the six years between
his 1st grade and the 7th grade attendance, the building really had not changed
much. The floors at Shawnee were warped, plaster was falling off the walls, and
there were large holes in the walls in the front part of the building. * * *
       “When Chris Thompson was at Shawnee, the gymnasium had a leaking
roof, and at one time part of the gym was flooded due to leakage. When a ball hit
the ceiling while students were playing kickball or volleyball, part of the ceiling
came down. The locker rooms below the stage area and adjacent to the gym had
almost no water pressure, stunk, and were unfit for student use. Students changed
clothes in two storage rooms next to the stage, but had no shower facilities
available.
       “When Chris Thompson began to attend high school, the high school
building did not have heat due to construction and renovation of the heating system
in the fall of 1992 until the end of November or the beginning of December.




                                          68
                                  January Term, 1997




Students had to wear coats and gloves to classes, and were subjected to fumes from
large kerosene heaters when the building got very cold.
        “* * * All of the pupils who attended the elementary and middle school
buildings at Southern Local remained improperly housed until the fall of 1993.”
(Citations to evidence omitted.)
        {¶ 133} As a result of the passage of a 1990 local tax levy and state
assistance provided through the Classroom Facilities Act, the district completed, in
1993, the construction of new elementary and middle school facilities. Shawnee,
Moxahala, New Straitsville and Corning schools were closed. The new facilities
have had a very positive effect on students and their performance. However, the
new facilities have still left the district with numerous unmet facility needs. Miller
High School was somewhat improved during the construction project, but the
improvements were not nearly sufficient to correct the ills plaguing that facility.
The district apparently does not raise enough funding to properly furnish the new
facilities and will likely be unable to keep the new facilities in a state of good repair.
Further, the district faced (and probably still faces) a problem as to what to do with
the facilities that are no longer in use. It was estimated that to demolish Shawnee
would cost the district $800,000. The district owns three other facilities that are no
longer in use as schools. The district needs money to deal with these properties in
a responsible manner.
                           Northern Local School District
        {¶ 134} The plight of the Northern Local School District is truly tragic, as
reflected by the trial court’s findings of fact. As of the time of trial, Northern Local
was thirtieth in line to get on the list of school districts approved for Classroom
Facilities Act funding. The significance of this fact should not be overlooked. If
Northern Local was not immediately entitled to funding for its facilities, it makes
me wonder how disastrous the situation is in other school districts across this state




                                           69
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




and how long it will take for the needs of the districts to be addressed under the
current system of school funding.
       {¶ 135} In July or August 1992, the bricks were bulging out near the parapet
at the north end of the Somerset Elementary School. An engineer examined the
building and recommended that it be closed.         The Department of Education
inspected the building and observed that the bricks on the parapet walls were bowed
out and represented a hazard to pupils. The Department of Education strongly
recommended that the facility be closed for safety reasons. The school district
sought emergency financial help from the Department of Education and others, but
was told that there was no money available to aid the district in addressing its
emergency situation.
       {¶ 136} In October 1992, the Northern Local School District Board of
Education decided to close the Somerset school building. Before the building was
closed, the district erected scaffolding around the entire building and canopies over
doorways to protect students from falling bricks. When Somerset was finally
closed, some of the students were required to be temporarily educated in facilities
within the New Lexington School District. Busing the children to New Lexington
on a daily basis resulted in the children missing part of the school day. As a result
of the closing of Somerset Elementary, classes throughout the Northern Local
School District had to be rearranged to accommodate the displaced Somerset school
students.
       {¶ 137} At the time of trial, Glenford Elementary School was housed in two
separate buildings. The windows and roofs of both buildings leaked, the lighting
was bad, and the restroom facilities were deplorable. State Route 204 runs between
the two buildings. The road is heavily traveled, especially by trucks transporting
sand. Kindergarten through second grade students must cross the highway up to
five times a day for, among other things, lunch and recess. The restrooms smell
bad, look terrible, and are in need of replumbing. Because of limited class space,




                                         70
                                 January Term, 1997




kindergarten students must climb three flights of stairs to use a bathroom. The roof
in one of the buildings leaks even when it is not raining due to water trapped
between layers in the roof. In November 1992, the Ohio EPA found high levels of
arsenic in the water wells that service the Glenford school buildings. The district
sought financial aid from the state to address this problem, but no aid was
forthcoming.
        {¶ 138} At Thornville Elementary, the roof and windows leak continually.
Particle board was placed over peeling plaster. In the summer of 1993, when a
piece of particle board was removed, maggot and ant infestations were discovered.
The mortar is decaying and needs to be replaced or repaired.
        {¶ 139} Recently, Northern Local was informed by an engineer employed
to study the district’s facility problems that if the Thornville and Glenford buildings
were not renovated they would have to be closed. Given the debt limitation of R.C.
133.06, the district could not borrow enough to construct a building complex to
house students in kindergarten through eighth grade. To build such a building, the
district would have had to generate somewhere between $14 and $15 million. As
of November 1993 the total assessed valuation in the district was approximately
$90 million. The R.C. 133.06 debt limits restrict the district to nine percent of the
district’s total assessed valuation except under specified conditions. Thus, a new
complex was not an option. Accordingly, the school board proposed to renovate
Glenford, Thornville, Somerset, and the junior/senior high complex to meet the
district’s needs. To achieve that goal, the board put a $6.5 million bond issue before
the voters in May and August 1993. The issue failed. The board placed another
bond issue before the voters in November 1993 for $6.3 million (5.26 mills), which
would not have been nearly enough for the district to take care of its facilities needs.
That issue failed as well. The trial court found that the facilities in Northern Local
“had not changed in the past 20 years.”
                                          III




                                          71
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




              Constitutional Guarantees Related to Public Education
       {¶ 140} The history of some of Ohio’s constitutional provisions relating to
education is simply fascinating. Some of the history is set forth below to emphasize
the important role education has played in the development of our state and nation.
       {¶ 141} Following the Revolutionary War, the Confederate Congress, in the
Land Ordinance of May 20, 1785, provided for the surveying and sale of lands in
what was then known as the Western Territory. That territory, as described in the
ordinance, included lands that would eventually become Ohio.            In the Land
Ordinance, Congress reserved one thirty-sixth of every township in the Western
Territory expressly for the maintenance of public schools, stating: “There shall be
reserved the lot No. 16, of every township, for the maintenance of public schools
within the said township.” 1 Laws of the United States 563, 565. Since the
townships under the congressional survey were to be six miles square, this meant
that a section of every township measuring one mile square would be devoted to
educational use. Spayde, Lewis & Jollay, Baldwin’s Ohio School Law (1984) 2,
Section 1.03. “It was the intention of Congress in making this generous grant that
these lands, approximately 704,488 acres in all, intelligently managed, would
support the public schools of the state in perpetuity, so that there would be no need
to tax the citizens for the cost of operating the public school system.” Id.
       {¶ 142} Following the enactment of the 1785 Land Ordinance, a group of
land speculators incorporated to form the Ohio Company of Associates. See,
generally, IV Dictionary of American History (1940) 162-163.             This group,
represented by Reverend Manasseh Cutler, contracted with Congress for the
purchase of a large section of the public lands northwest of the Ohio River. Id. The
terms of the negotiated agreement stipulated support for public education, requiring
that lot No. 16 of each township was to be given perpetually to the purposes stated
in the Land Ordinance of 1785, i.e., the maintenance of public schools. The
agreement also included a provision that not more than two complete townships of




                                         72
                               January Term, 1997




good land were to be given perpetually to the purposes of a university. See,
generally, Swan, Land Laws For Ohio (1825) 15-25 (documenting provisions of
law leading to the acquisition of lands by the Ohio Company of Associates). The
provisions of this agreement formed the basis for other land purchases in the Ohio
country. Id. at 26 et seq.
       {¶ 143} In 1787, the Confederate Congress enacted the Northwest Territory
Ordinance to provide for the government of the territory and the eventual
establishment of states northwest of the Ohio River. The Northwest Territory
Ordinance of 1787 provided, as an article of compact between the original states
and the inhabitants of the territory northwest of the Ohio River, that: “Religion,
morality, and knowledge being necessary to good government and the happiness of
mankind, schools and the means of education shall forever be encouraged.” Section
14, Article III, Northwest Territory Ordinance of 1787. 1 Laws of the United States
475, 479. The means of forever encouraging the schools had been set forth in the
Land Ordinance of 1785, in which lot No. 16 of every township was reserved for
the maintenance of public education.
       {¶ 144} The Land Ordinance of 1785 and the Northwest Territory
Ordinance of 1787 set the stage for the development of the Northwest Territory into
stabilized promised lands. The plan for stabilization revolved around a means of
public education. Hyman, American Singularity (1986) 23-24, states that:
       “Visions of the West as a nursery of republican virtues over a vast continent
whose very boundaries were still unknown in 1787 excited Confederation
congressmen in New York City and the framers of the Constitution in Philadelphia.
Fee-simple ownership by large numbers of smallholders would transform the
frontier, where civilization was at risk, into settlements where morality and laws
(including the responsibilities to repay debts) would be honored and national
cohesion maintained. Publicly supported education, a topic of the 1785 and 1787
statutes, would create literate, free farmers who would staff the governments




                                        73
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




sketched in the 1787 law. Because settlers derived their titles to land and attendant
property from the nation, these unservile land-busters and their children, whose
right to education was also a statutory duty of government, would be linked in
grateful loyalty to the nation and to the new state they had conceived.
       “This goal of linkage makes understandable why the Northwest Ordinance
implanted commitments to public education in the territorial chrysalis of future
states. In planning the republic, most supporters of the Constitution and the
ordinance espoused not-yet Federalist ‘loose construction-internal improvement’
doctrines and policies. In addition to advocating roads, turnpikes, canals, and forts,
such supporters gave priority to various forms of public education, all aiming to
make the frontier quickly interdependent with the dismayingly distant East. * * *
Therefore, the 1787 Ordinance is known for its Article III, on schools: ‘Religion,
morality, and knowledge being necessary to good government and the happiness of
mankind, schools and the means of education shall forever be encouraged.’”
(Footnote omitted.)
       {¶ 145} On November 1, 1802, delegates assembled in Ross County, Ohio,
for the purpose of establishing a state government and constitution for Ohio. The
delegates expressed their views on the fundamental importance of education by
adopting, as part of the Ohio Constitution of 1802, two significant provisions.
Specifically, Section 3, Article VIII of the Ohio Constitution of 1802 repeated the
requirement of the Northwest Territory Ordinance that schools and the means of
instruction must forever be encouraged. Section 3, Article VIII of the Ohio
Constitution of 1802 provided, in part: “But religion, morality and knowledge,
being essentially necessary to good government and the happiness of mankind,
schools and the means of instruction shall forever be encouraged by legislative
provision, not inconsistent with the rights of conscience.” (Emphasis added.) In
addition, the delegates at the 1802 Constitutional Convention agreed to the
following language contained in Section 25, Article VIII of the 1802 Ohio




                                         74
                                January Term, 1997




Constitution: “That no law shall be passed to prevent the poor in the several
counties and townships within this state from an equal participation in the schools,
academies, colleges and universities within this state, which are endowed, in whole
or in part, from the revenue arising from donations made by the United States, for
the support of schools and colleges; and the doors of the said schools, academies
and universities, shall be open for the reception of scholars, students and teachers,
of every grade, without any distinction or preference whatever, contrary to the
intent for which said donations were made.” Clearly, given the munificent land
grants by Congress in support of public education, the framers of the 1802 Ohio
Constitution had great expectations that Ohio’s public school system, aided by
legislative provision, would be adequate to afford an outstanding education (not
just a rudimentary education) to the entire population.
       {¶ 146} Ohio’s second Constitutional Convention occurred in 1850-1851.
Similar to the provisions of Section 3, Article VIII of the Ohio Constitution of 1802,
Section 7, Article I of the Ohio Constitution of 1851 provides, in part: “Religion,
morality, and knowledge, however, being essential to good government, it shall be
the duty of the General Assembly to pass suitable laws, to protect every religious
denomination in the peaceable enjoyment of its own mode of public worship, and
to encourage schools and the means of instruction.”              (Emphasis added.)
Additionally, underscoring the importance of intellect and instruction, the delegates
to the 1850-1851 Ohio Constitutional Convention devoted an entire Article of the
Constitution (Article VI) to the subject of public education.
       {¶ 147} Section 2, Article VI of the Ohio Constitution, which has remained
unaltered since its adoption in 1851, provides: “The general assembly shall make
such provisions, by taxation, or otherwise, as, with the income arising from the
school trust fund, will secure a thorough and efficient system of common schools
throughout the State; but no religious or other sect, or sects, shall ever have any
exclusive right to, or control of, any part of the school funds of this State.” The




                                         75
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




debates from the 1850-1851 Constitutional Convention provide some insight into
the purpose of Section 2, Article VI of the Ohio Constitution.
       {¶ 148} The delegates to the 1850-1851 Ohio Constitutional Convention
clearly viewed education as the duty of government and the right of all people
regardless of their station in life. During the convention there were heated debates
over the subject of education. For example, on Wednesday, December 4, 1850, the
convention considered a report of the standing committee on education. II Report
of the Debates and Proceedings of the Convention for the Revision of the
Constitution of the State of Ohio, 1850-51 (1851) (“Debates”) at 10. The report
recommended adoption of three sections, one of which provided: “The General
Assembly shall make such provision by taxation and other means (in addition to
the income arising from the irreductible fund) as will secure a thorough and
efficient system of Common Schools, free to all children in the State.” Id. at 11.
During the debates concerning this section of the report, William Sawyer of
Auglaize County rose to propose an amendment that free public education be
provided to white children only. Id. The proposed amendment did not fare well at
the convention. James Taylor of Erie County rose to address the proposal. Portions
of his stirring speech are entirely worthy of quotation here. Directing his comments
to the racist inclinations of Mr. Sawyer, Taylor stated:
       “I confess, sir, that I am surprised. I did not expect that a motion of this
kind would be made by any gentleman on this floor. I did not, on the other hand,
suppose that any proposition to extend the political rights of the colored citizens of
Ohio would be adopted; but I had supposed that a knowledge of the law of self-
preservation would have suggested to the gentleman from Auglaize [Mr. Sawyer]
and to every gentleman upon the floor, that it would be good policy to give to all
within the reach of our laws a good moral and intellectual training. I knew that this
Convention was not prepared to increase the political rights of the black man; but I
had hoped that all were willing to provide against his becoming the pest of society,




                                         76
                                January Term, 1997




by being deprived of all opportunities for education. Shall we not secure protection
to ourselves and our children by relieving the colored population of Ohio, from the
absolute necessity of growing up in vice and ignorance? Shall we, by the adoption
of the amendment of the gentleman from Auglaize, constitute a class who will
become the inmates of our poor houses, and the tenants of our jails? I think it must
be clear to every reflecting mind that the true policy of the statesman is to provide
the means of education, and consequent moral improvement, to every child in the
State, the offspring of the black man equally with that of the white man, the children
of the poor equally with the rich. * * *
       “* * *
       “* * * Education will tend to make men moral and useful members of
society, therefore let us provide for the education of every child in this state.”
Debates at 11.
       {¶ 149} William Bates of Jefferson County stated:
       “View this question as you will—as a matter of morality or of political
economy, a question of right or expediency, the State would materially suffer if a
provision to exclude any class of children from the benefits of common schools,
should be engrafted in the new Constitution. The experience of the past has shown
that morality and virtue keeps pace with education and that degradation and vice
are the inevitable results of ignorance. Good policy, humanity, and above all, the
spirit of the Christian religion, demands that we should provide for the education
of every child in the State.” Debates at 13.
       {¶ 150} Following Mr. Taylor’s and Mr. Bates’s statements and others, a
motion was made to amend the section of the report to provide for a set amount of
annual expenditures for the purpose of securing a thorough and efficient system of
common schools available to all children in the state. Debates at 13. While this
proposal was not adopted, it drew many statements reflecting how strongly the




                                           77
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




delegates felt about the importance of education. For example, consider the
eloquent speech of Samuel Quigley of Columbiana County, a physician:
       “The third section of the report directs the Legislature to make full and
ample provision for securing a thorough and efficient system of common school
education, free to all the children in the State. The language in this section is
expressive of the liberality worthy [of] a great State, and a great people. That this
is an age of improvement and progress is admitted by all who are acquainted with
the great and important transactions of the present century. That a spirit of
education is increasing in our beloved country is known from common observation,
and should not only be hailed, but cherished with delight.
       “Science has dispelled the darkness from our land which for ages benighted
the inhabitants of the old world, and gave the tyrant power to sway an iron sceptre
over their subjects, and by discouraging instruction and keeping them in ignorance,
perpetuated their servitude—continued them in degradation—shackled with
despotic chains, not knowing that they were men capable of being free and
governing themselves. This condition of things has become changed—intelligence,
the truth of divine revelation—liberty of conscience—self-government—freedom
of the press—free and fair discussion, together with freedom of thought, have
brought our free citizens from under the dominion of tyranny, declaring and
demonstrating to the world that great truth, that men are born free and equal and
capable of governing themselves. Had not knowledge been shed upon the human
understanding, all would have remained in the darkness of heathenism, and
governed by superstition and fanaticism, our country would have still borne
testimony to savage cruelty; the banks of our majestic Ohio would have been the
theatre of the war dance and deeds of savage cruelty.
       “* * *
       “Intelligence is the foundation-stone upon which this mighty Republic
rests—its future destiny depends upon the impulse, the action of the present




                                         78
                                 January Term, 1997




generation in the promotion of literature. Will we not, are we not, as patriots, bound
in solemn duty to use our energies, our influence to forward this greatest of interests
to present and future generations; and especially will the great State of Ohio fall
short in so mighty an enterprise—so essential and indispensable a duty? * * *
Arouse, then, citizens of Ohio, to your best interests, and show that you are not only
able to compete in agriculture, in public improvement, in commerce—yes, and in
the battlefield, with other States, but also in intelligence.” Debates at 14-15.
          {¶ 151} One of the delegates (William Hawkins of Morgan County)
provided particularly clear insight into the concept of a “thorough and efficient”
system of public education. He was “opposed to too great minuteness in the detail
of our Constitution” concerning the specifics of education, but observed, “[W]e are
warranted by public sentiment in requiring at the hands of the General Assembly a
full, complete and efficient system of public education.”         (Emphasis added.)
Debates at 16. He stated: “Enjoin upon the Legislature the duty of establishing an
efficient system [of education], and we shall have done our duty.” Id.
          {¶ 152} Following these and other discussions, the report was recommitted
to the standing committee on education.         Debates at 18.     Its revised report
recommended adoption of the following:
          “The General Assembly shall make such provisions, by taxation or
otherwise, as, with the income arising from the school trust funds, will secure a
thorough and efficient system of common schools throughout the State, and place
the means of instruction in the common branches of education, for a suitable portion
of the year, within the reach of all the children therein, of suitable age and capacity
for learning; Provided, that no religious or other sect or sects, shall ever have any
exclusive right to, or control of any part of the school funds of this State.” Debates
at 698.
          {¶ 153} John Larwill of Wayne County moved to amend the first line of this
section by striking the word “shall” and inserting the word “may.” Id. at 699. The




                                          79
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




proposed amendment was rejected without discussion. Mr. McCormick of Adams
County then moved to amend the same section by striking out the words “a suitable
portion,” and substituting in lieu thereof the words “at least six months.” Id. This
and other proposals concerning the length of the school year were rejected upon a
majority consensus that such matters are to be left for the legislature to determine.
Debates at 699 et seq.
       {¶ 154} The eventual product of the debates was the current version of
Section 2, Article VI, mandating that the General Assembly “shall make such
provisions, by taxation, or otherwise, as, with the income arising from the school
trust fund, will secure a thorough and efficient system of common schools
throughout the State.” As the Supreme Court of West Virginia recognized in
reviewing the debates surrounding the adoption of Section 2, Article VI of the Ohio
Constitution:
       “There was no explicit definition of the words ‘thorough and efficient’ that
appeared in the final committee report which the 1851 Ohio Convention adopted.
The tenor of the discussion, however, by those advocating the entire education
section as it was finally adopted, leaves no doubt that excellence was the goal,
rather than mediocrity; and that education of the public was intended to be a
fundamental function of the state government and a fundamental right of Ohioans.”
(Emphasis added.) Pauley v. Kelly (1979), 162 W.Va. 672, 685, 255 S.E.2d 859,
867.
       {¶ 155} The trial court found that education was a fundamental
constitutional right and that Ohio’s system of school funding violated Section 2,
Article VI, requiring the General Assembly to provide a thorough and efficient
system of common schools. Other constitutional provisions the trial court relied
upon in striking down Ohio’s school funding laws are as follows:
       (1) Section 2, Article I of the Ohio Constitution, which provides that:




                                         80
                                 January Term, 1997




        “All political power is inherent in the people. Government is instituted for
their equal protection and benefit, and they have the right to alter, reform, or abolish
the same, whenever they may deem it necessary; and no special privileges or
immunities shall ever be granted, that may not be altered, revoked, or repealed by
the General Assembly.”
        (2) Section 26, Article II, which states:
        “All laws, of a general nature, shall have a uniform operation throughout
the State; nor shall any act, except such as relates to public schools, be passed, to
take effect upon the approval of any other authority than the General Assembly,
except, as otherwise provided in this constitution.”
        (3) Section 3, Article VIII, which states:
        “Except the debts above specified in sections one and two, no debt whatever
shall hereafter be created by or on behalf of the State.”
        (4) Section 4, Article XII, which states:
        “The General Assembly shall provide for raising revenue, sufficient to
defray the expenses of the State, for each year, and also a sufficient sum to pay
principal and interest as they become due on the state debt.”
        {¶ 156} While I have reviewed them, I make no comment regarding items
(2), (3) and (4) immediately above because comment is not necessary in arriving at
the conclusions reached herein.
                                          IV
                 Cincinnati City School Dist. Bd. of Edn. v. Walter
        {¶ 157} In Walter, 58 Ohio St.2d 368, 12 O.O.3d 327, 390 N.E.2d 813, this
court reviewed constitutional challenges to the General Assembly’s enactment of
the Equal Yield Formula for computing state aid. See discussion in Part II, supra.
The formula was designed to provide an equal sum of combined state and local
funds, on a per-mill per-pupil basis, for each qualifying school district. The formula
provided a two-tiered system of funding—every school district received an amount




                                          81
                              SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




per pupil per mill for the first twenty mills and additional amounts were given to
each school district with millage above twenty mills up to thirty mills. The court
in Walter discussed the applicable test for determining whether the Equal Yield
Formula violated the Equal Protection Clause of the Ohio Constitution, stating:
        “Simply stated, the test is that unequal treatment of classes of persons by a
state is valid only if the state can show that a rational basis exists for the inequality,
unless the discrimination impairs the exercise of a fundamental right or establishes
a suspect classification. * * * If the discrimination infringes upon a fundamental
right, it becomes the subject of strict judicial scrutiny and will be upheld only upon
a showing that it is justified by a compelling state interest. That is, once the
existence of a fundamental right or a suspect class is shown to be involved, the state
must assume the heavy burden of proving that the legislation is constitutional.”
Walter at 373-374, 12 O.O.3d at 330, 390 N.E.2d at 818.
        {¶ 158} In discussing whether education was to be considered a
fundamental right guaranteed by the Ohio Constitution, the court in Walter cited
San Antonio Indep. School Dist. v. Rodriguez (1973), 411 U.S. 1, 93 S.Ct. 1278, 36
L.Ed.2d 16. Walter at 374, 12 O.O.3d at 331, 390 N.E.2d at 818. Rodriguez sets
forth the test for determining whether education is a fundamental right under the
United States Constitution.       The Rodriguez test is whether the Constitution
implicitly or explicitly guarantees a right to education. Rodriguez at 33-34, 93 S.Ct.
at 1297, 36 L.Ed.2d at 43. Walter recognized that “if this court were to accept this
test, educational opportunity would be a fundamental interest entitled to strict
scrutiny.” Walter at 374, 12 O.O.3d at 331, 390 N.E.2d at 818. The court in Walter
rejected the Rodriguez test, however, finding a distinction between the grant of
powers of the United States Constitution and the Ohio Constitution. Id. at 374-375,
12 O.O.3d at 331, 390 N.E.2d at 818-819. The court stated that “because this cause
deals with difficult questions of local and statewide taxation, fiscal planning and
education policy, we feel that this is an inappropriate cause in which to invoke




                                           82
                                 January Term, 1997




‘strict scrutiny.’ This case is more directly concerned with the way in which Ohio
has decided to collect and spend state and local taxes than it is a challenge to the
way in which Ohio educates its children.” Id. at 375-376, 12 O.O.3d at 331-332,
390 N.E.2d at 819. The Walter court rejected the equal protection challenges to the
Equal Yield Formula, finding that the per-pupil expenditure disparities in Ohio
could be rationally justified on the basis of local control of education, i.e., each
local school district could develop programs to meet perceived local needs. Id. at
376-382, 12 O.O.3d at 332-335, 390 N.E.2d at 819-822. The court in Walter also
rejected an argument that the Equal Yield Formula violated the Thorough and
Efficient Clause of the Ohio Constitution, finding insufficient proof of a violation
of the standards set forth in Miller v. Korns (1923), 107 Ohio St. 287, 140 N.E. 773.
Walter at 386-388, 12 O.O.3d at 337-339, 390 N.E.2d at 824-826. See discussion
of Miller in Part V, infra.
       {¶ 159} The trial court found that Walter was not controlling precedent on
the issues involved in the case at bar. The court of appeals disagreed, concluding
that the system of educational funding had not substantially changed since Walter
was decided and that, therefore, Walter dictated a finding that Ohio’s current
scheme of school funding is constitutionally acceptable. However, I find that
Walter is clearly not controlling in the case at bar.
       {¶ 160} The Equal Yield Formula at issue in Walter was repealed shortly
after Walter was decided. The case at bar involves a funding scheme entirely
different from that applicable in Walter. Moreover, Walter involved a challenge to
only one aspect of school funding. Conversely, the case at bar involves a wholesale
constitutional attack on the entire system of school funding, including the impact
of tax reduction factors, mandated programs of school district borrowing, the
inadequacy of classroom facilities, etc. Further, and perhaps most important, the
decision in Walter clearly indicates that the General Assembly had provided in the
legislation at issue in Walter a funding level under the Equal Yield Formula of $960




                                          83
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




per pupil at twenty mills up to $1,380 per pupil at thirty mills. Walter, 58 Ohio
St.2d at 371, 12 O.O.3d at 329, 390 N.E.2d at 817. The court in Walter specifically
determined that the General Assembly had enacted the legislation to ensure $960
per pupil upon the recommendation of a joint, nonpartisan legislative committee
that found that a $960 guarantee at the twenty-mill level was sufficient to provide
the means for an adequate educational program of high quality in each district.
Walter at 371-372 and 382, 12 O.O.3d at 329 and 335, 390 N.E.2d at 817 and 822,
and fn. 1. The evidence in the case at bar clearly indicates that the funding level
set by today’s School Foundation Program has absolutely no connection with what
is necessary to ensure a high quality education. Indeed, evidence in the record
clearly demonstrates that the minimum funding level of the School Foundation
Program has not been adequate to ensure a high quality education in each of Ohio’s
public school districts. Testimony indicated that a formula amount of $4,000 per
pupil was necessary at the time this case was tried, whereas the General Assembly
had set the basic per-pupil funding amount at about seventy percent of that rate.
Further, at oral argument, both Justice Resnick and Justice Pfeifer established by
their questioning that neither the General Assembly nor the Department of
Education had commenced any study or made any finding as to the cost of a
minimum level of education. Likewise at oral argument, the State Solicitor of the
Office of the Attorney General of the state of Ohio conceded that if funding for
primary and/or secondary education fell below the level necessary to provide every
student a free basic, adequate education (a “floor,” he called it), that would be
violative of our Constitution.
       {¶ 161} The trial court held that this court’s decision in Walter “is confined
to its own set of facts.” I agree. The times and the law have changed since Walter
was decided. In the 1970s, the system of school funding then in effect was
determined to be constitutional. That system, the Equal Yield Formula was, for
whatever reason, abandoned shortly after Walter was decided. Today, the record




                                         84
                               January Term, 1997




before this court leads to the inescapable conclusion that Ohio’s system of school
funding cannot be reconciled with the applicable constitutional mandates
concerning public education.




                                       85
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




                                         V
            The Thorough and Efficient Clause of Section 2, Article VI
        {¶ 162} In Miller v. Korns, 107 Ohio St. at 297-298, 140 N.E. at 776, this
court stated that:
        “Section 2, Article VI of the Ohio Constitution, provides as follows:
        “‘The General Assembly shall make such provisions, by taxation, or
otherwise, as, with the income arising from the school trust fund, will secure a
thorough and efficient system of common schools throughout the state. * * *’
        “This declaration is made by the people of the state. It calls for the
upbuilding of a system of schools throughout the state, and the attainment of
efficiency and thoroughness in that system is thus expressly made a purpose, not
local, not municipal, but state-wide.
        “With this very state purpose in view, regarding the problem as a state-wide
problem, the sovereign people made it mandatory upon the General Assembly to
secure not merely a system of common schools, but a system thorough and efficient
throughout the state.
        “A thorough system could not mean one in which part or any number of the
school districts of the state were starved for funds. An efficient system could not
mean one in which part or any number of the school districts of the state lacked
teachers, buildings, or equipment.
        “In the attainment of the purpose of establishing an efficient and thorough
system of schools throughout the state it was easily conceivable that the greatest
expense might arise in the poorest districts; that portions of great cities, teeming
with life, would be able to contribute relatively little in taxes for the support of
schools, which are the main hope for enlightening these districts, while districts
underpopulated with children might represent such taxation value that their school
needs would be relatively oversupplied.” (Emphasis sic.)




                                         86
                                January Term, 1997




       {¶ 163} The trial court’s findings of fact document that the appellant school
districts and other districts throughout this state are starved for funds. The court’s
findings document that the appellant districts and others lack appropriate books.
Some districts, including the appellant school districts, lack appropriate buildings.
This cannot be denied, given the state of the record and the identified $10.2 billion
in facilities needs.   The record documents that many school districts lack
experienced and qualified teachers. Thus, applying the test of Miller, it is obvious
that the General Assembly has failed in its constitutional obligation to ensure a
thorough and efficient system of common schools.
       {¶ 164} The debates from the 1850-1851 Constitutional Convention clearly
indicate that the word “thorough” in Section 2, Article VI of the Ohio Constitution
was intended to mean a system of education that is full, absolute, complete, and
nearly perfect. See discussion in Part III, supra. The debates make clear that the
word “efficient” was intended to mean useful, effective, and working well. Id. A
review of the record demonstrates that Ohio’s system of public elementary and
secondary education is, to a degree, neither thorough nor efficient.           In its
memorandum decision in this case, the trial court stated:
       “This Court heard thirty days of testimony as the only individual in the State
of Ohio to be present for the entire proceedings. Attorneys, bailiffs, court reporters
and members of the gallery were either replaced or were absent from some sessions.
Throughout this case this Court heard from school children, teachers, principals,
superintendents, school board members, legislators and other state personnel. The
sincerity and conviction to educate from both the Plaintiff and Defense witnesses
[were] evident. This Court saw grown men and women cry as they explained the
conditions and situations in which some of the youth of this State are educated.
They deserve better and the State as their bridge builders to the future [is] duty
bound to provide them with better tools for a successful life. The law requires the
same. Some students in the Plaintiff school districts lack equipment, supplies,




                                         87
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




textbooks, technology, [and] proper handicap access and many of our special
education students are not receiving an appropriate public education.
       “In the Walter case the Supreme Court of Ohio relied upon the State’s
assurances that education was thorough and efficient in part based upon the
minimum standards being met. Today the new minimum standards are not even
being monitored and haven’t been for several years. The new standard for review
is the ninth grade proficiency test. At trial time 32 of 99 Seniors from Plaintiff
Dawson-Bryant had not passed; 16 of 79 Seniors at Plaintiff Southern Local; 13 or
[sic, of] 154 at Plaintiff Northern Local; 300 of 773 at Plaintiff Youngstown City
Schools and 27% of Lima Seniors had not passed. Can a system that has nearly
17,000 Seniors who have not as yet passed the ninth grade proficiency test consider
itself thorough and efficient? The same question can be asked of a system whose
equality of funding ranks it the third worst in the country behind Missouri (declared
unconstitutional) and Alaska. * * *
       “Some of our students are being educated in former coal bins in Mt. Gilead.
In Flushing the students have no restroom in the school building itself. In Brown
County the only library is an abandoned library truck; the band practices in the
kitchen and plays in the cafeteria during lunch. In Nelsonville the building is
slipping down a hill. At Plaintiff Northern Local children are educated in modular
units situated outside the school with no running water. At Plaintiff Southern Local
students recently completed their entire school careers in buildings that for the most
part were determined to be improper housing in 1981. * * *”
       {¶ 165} There is no question that Ohio’s system of school funding violates
the Thorough and Efficient Clause of the Ohio Constitution. The same could be
said with respect to the provisions of Section 7, Article I of the Ohio Constitution
that mandate that the General Assembly pass suitable laws to encourage schools
and the means of instruction. “Suitable laws” cannot mean laws which, by their




                                         88
                                   January Term, 1997




own operation or in conjunction with other laws, deprive Ohio’s school children of
the high quality educational opportunities to which they are entitled.
                                             VI
                                     Equal Protection
        {¶ 166} Contrary to the conclusion reached by the court of appeals, Walter,
58 Ohio St.2d 368, 12 O.O.3d 327, 390 N.E.2d 813, did not determine the question
whether education in Ohio is a fundamental constitutional right. That question was
not directly presented to the Walter court. Rather, Walter dealt only peripherally
with the question of the fundamental right of education when it rejected the
fundamental-right analysis of Rodriguez, 411 U.S. 1, 93 S.Ct. 1278, 36 L.Ed.2d 16.
See discussion in Part IV, supra. Today, this court is specifically called upon to
determine whether education in Ohio is a fundamental constitutional right. The
trial court held, and I agree, that it is.
        {¶ 167} Since Walter was decided, this court has repeatedly applied a test
for determining fundamental rights consistent with the Rodriguez test, i.e., whether
the right at issue is explicitly or implicitly guaranteed by the state or federal
Constitution. For example, this court recently held, in Cleveland v. Arnold (1993),
67 Ohio St.3d 35, 44, 616 N.E.2d 163, 170, that “[f]undamental rights (personal
liberties) are those rights which are explicitly or implicitly embraced by our
Constitution and the federal Constitution. Our goal should be to preserve the
existence of these sacred rights.” (Footnote omitted.) Clearly, the right to a free
public education in Ohio has always been considered a right of the people and a
duty of government. The Ohio Constitution explicitly so provides in its various
provisions addressing the subject of education. Moreover, the right to a free
elementary and secondary public school education is implicit in the concept of
ordered liberty.      The framers of the 1850-1851 Ohio Constitution clearly
acknowledged that education is the foundation upon which all other individual
liberties are based. Their debates can lead to no other conclusion than that




                                             89
                              SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




education is a fundamental right guaranteed to all of Ohio’s school-age children.
Further, the Land Ordinance of 1785 and Northwest Territory Ordinance of 1787
embodied the grand ideal that education was to be the cornerstone of the vast and
orderly migration westward. Indeed, education is the institution upon which this
great nation was built.
        {¶ 168} Accordingly, I would hold that education in Ohio is a fundamental
constitutional right guaranteed by the Ohio Constitution. As Judge Gwin so ably
noted in his concurring and dissenting opinion in the court of appeals, “I believe
that education is a fundamental right. More than one-third of the entire state budget
is devoted to education. An entire Article of our State Constitution addresses public
education, and it mandates that schools be adequately funded so that our schools
are thorough and efficient. Finally, common sense dictates that nothing is more
important to Ohio’s children than to make them competitive and fulfilled
personally. To hold otherwise is to bury our heads in the sand.”
        {¶ 169} Because education is a fundamental right, the school funding
legislation is subject to a strict scrutiny standard of review for purposes of
determining whether the legislation violates the Equal Protection Clause of Section
2, Article I of the Ohio Constitution. Appellees have taken the position that local
control justifies the large wealth-based disparities created by Ohio’s system of
school funding.     I disagree.    Rather, I agree in toto with the trial court’s
observations:
        “Local control in many of this State’s school districts and specifically in the
Plaintiff school districts is a cruel illusion. Plaintiff Northern Local School District
has primarily engaged in ‘crisis management’ during the 1990’s and has been
forced to forgo building repairs, textbook renewal, advanced placement options and
full handicapped access. Plaintiff Lima City Schools has spent over $10 million
dollars since 1980 to comply with unfunded state mandates and has been unable to
purchase necessary educational equipment and supplies, expand elementary




                                          90
                                 January Term, 1997




guidance services or offer all-day every-day kindergarten. Plaintiff Dawson-Bryant
School District has been unable to implement advanced placement courses, all-day
every-day kindergarten, textbook replacement and full handicapped access to its
building. Plaintiff Southern Local School District is simply reacting to state
mandated regulations and deciding what programs and services to cut. * * *
Plaintiff Youngstown City School District no longer makes proactive decisions
about what programs to add and policies to implement based upon the best interest
of the students. Instead, * * * the board[’]s decisions mainly regard the cutting of
programs.
        “It can be argued that the local school districts possess control of local
education through the ability to raise their level of funding through tax increases.
Due to the Plaintiff school districts being some of the poorest in the State this is not
a viable option. The fact that school districts have the ‘ability’ to determine how
dollars are spent in some circumstances is a hollow argument when there are not
sufficient funds to provide for the educational and facility needs of their particular
school district. * * *
        “* * * As the Plaintiffs have argued in this case local control without
discretionary funds is a myth and does not justify the vast disparities in educational
funding and educational opportunity throughout this State. There is only one
system of education in this State and that is a state system. The local control
currently realized by the Plaintiff school districts is not sufficient justification for
the discriminatory educational opportunities afforded to the students of this State.”
        {¶ 170} The concept of local control is a myth for the appellant school
districts and others. The notion of local control is a particularly cruel illusion for
school districts that have been subjected to state supervision under the provisions
of R.C. 3313.48 et seq. Finally, on the issue of local control, if local control is
really an issue, why have over five hundred fifty of the state’s six hundred eleven




                                          91
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




school districts joined together as a coalition to support this case? Just asking the
question would seem to answer the “local control” contention.
        {¶ 171} The state bears a heavy burden of demonstrating a compelling state
interest for the wealth-based disparities inherent in Ohio’s system of school
funding, but there are no legitimate excuses. Ohio’s system of school funding
violates Section 2, Article I of the Ohio Constitution.
                                        VII
                                  The Trial Judge
        {¶ 172} I believe the trial judge, the Honorable Linton D. Lewis, Jr., did a
magnificent job in handling this most difficult case. Judge Lewis clearly did not
and does not deserve the criticism and abuse he has taken for doing his job. From
afar (and to my knowledge I have never met Judge Lewis), I have admired his
restraint in not responding to unwarranted attacks from persons in high places—
some of them lawyers. He has acquitted himself well and has followed to the letter
Canon 3(A) of the Code of Judicial Conduct, which provides that: “(1) A judge
should be faithful to the law and maintain professional competence in it. He should
be unswayed by partisan interests, public clamor, or fear of criticism,” and “(3) A
judge should be patient, dignified, and courteous to litigants, jurors, witnesses,
lawyers, and others with whom he deals in his official capacity * * *.” (Emphasis
added.) He makes me, once again, proud to be a judge.
                                        VIII
                                    The Remedy
        {¶ 173} In his Inaugural Address delivered on Monday, January 20, 1997,
President William J. Clinton discussed his vision for “a land of new promise.” He
said that:
        “In this new land, education will be every citizen’s most prized possession.
Our schools will have the highest standards in the world, igniting the spark of
possibility in the eyes of every girl and every boy. And the doors of higher




                                         92
                                January Term, 1997




education will be open to all. The knowledge and power of the Information Age
will be within reach not just of the few, but of every classroom * * *.”
       {¶ 174} In his State of the State Address delivered on January 14, 1997, the
Governor of Ohio, in discussing the difficult choices that have to be made for the
funding of competing worthwhile programs, said that he wanted “to focus on the
one choice on which I know we can all agree—the need to build on the foundation
we have laid to make Ohio’s schools second to none, now and in the 21st century.”
(Emphasis added.) “Perhaps,” said the Governor, “the most significant thing we
have done since 1991 is to reinforce the idea that education is everybody’s
business—and that education improvement is our state’s number one priority.”
(Emphasis added.) The Honorable Governor also noted that “in a recent national
survey, 10 of our 13 public universities were ranked among the best in the nation.”
       {¶ 175} In his State of the Union Address on Tuesday, February 4, 1997, in
discussing the future of education in America and educational funding, the
President said:
       “One of the greatest sources of our strength throughout the Cold War was a
bipartisan foreign policy. Because our future was at stake, politics stopped at the
water’s edge. Now I ask you, and I ask all our nation’s governors, I ask parents,
teachers and citizens all across America, for a new nonpartisan commitment to
education, because education is a critical national security issue for our future and
politics must stop at the schoolhouse door.”
       {¶ 176} By our decision today, a majority of this court facilitates these
admirable goals. The remedy need not and should not be one which takes from the
rich to give to the poor. School districts that want to do even more for their school
children than the bare minimum should not be penalized.            Likewise, higher
education in Ohio should not be required to make even further sacrifices to meet
the obvious current shortfall in primary and secondary educational funding. Higher
education institutions cannot be the “Red Cross” for primary and secondary public




                                         93
                                 SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




education. For the job they are obviously doing their performance should be
rewarded—not penalized.           Thus, the remedy and solution must lie in other
initiatives.13 We can do better than our ranking of forty-eighth out of the fifty states
in the extent of disparity of revenue and expenditure per pupil.
        {¶ 177} Many of our public schools are in deplorable condition. This is a
documented $10 billion problem. In addition, too many schools are without proper
teaching     facilities—labs,     up-to-date textbooks,          supplies and adequately
compensated teachers. By our decision today we require the General Assembly to
act with all deliberate speed to establish a constitutional system of school funding
to address the formidable problems facing many of Ohio’s school districts.
        {¶ 178} Some might choose to ignore our decision.                     That would be
unfortunate—not necessarily for us or them but for the school children of Ohio who
depend upon all of us to give them, by way of educational opportunity, that which
we ourselves were afforded. Accordingly, to ensure compliance with our decision,
I am in complete agreement with the determination to remand this cause to the trial
court with plenary authority to enforce our decision.




13. It should not go unnoticed or unmentioned that Governor Voinovich and the General Assembly
have joined, under the Governor’s leadership, to make Ohio the leading state in “Head Start”
education. This humane initiative has reaped and will continue to reap tremendous dividends for
our children and our state.
         It also has not gone unnoticed that the General Assembly has provided, in recent budgets,
some additional funding for education and that even more is recommended in the current proposed
state budget for the next biennium. These initiatives are laudable and the Governor and General
Assembly should be commended for their efforts. The difficulty is that given the enormity of the
problem, the current fiscal constraints and the convoluted scheme for funding education now on the
law books of Ohio, such actions just cannot and will not get the job done.




                                               94
                                January Term, 1997




                                          IX
                              Costs and Attorney Fees
       {¶ 179} The trial court awarded costs and attorney fees in favor of
appellants. I agree with the majority’s determination reinstating the award of
attorney fees. The majority opinion does not discuss the award of costs but, by
reversing the judgment of the court of appeals, this court has essentially reinstated
the award of costs to appellants -- the parties who prevailed at trial.
                                          X
                                     Conclusion
       {¶ 180} I join today’s majority opinion without hesitation or reservation.
Ohio’s statutory scheme for funding public elementary and secondary education is
unconstitutional. A review of the record and the governing law can support no
other conclusion.
       RESNICK, J., concurs in the foregoing concurring opinion.
                               __________________

       ALICE ROBIE RESNICK, J., concurring.
       {¶ 181} I concur in the majority opinion and in the concurring opinion of
Justice Douglas.
       {¶ 182} I write separately primarily to underscore the fact that this case does
not seek equality of education throughout Ohio, but rather seeks a quality education
for every single child in Ohio regardless of where that child resides.
       {¶ 183} The dissent contends that this case involves a nonjusticiable
political question and that as a result this court should decline to address the issues
presented. However, in 1979, when this court decided Cincinnati School Dist. Bd.
of Edn. v. Walter (1979), 58 Ohio St.2d 368, 383-384, 12 O.O.3d 327, 336, 390
N.E.2d 813, 823-824, this court made clear that in certain instances we would have
jurisdiction to determine the constitutionality of Ohio’s system of funding public




                                          95
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




schools, and that the issue would be a justiciable question. We recognized and
distinguished the propriety of judicial review from the deference we would give to
the General Assembly’s determinations of policy. But that deference is not without
limits. The Walter court stated: “‘A thorough system could not mean one in which
part or any number of the school districts of the state were starved for funds. An
efficient system could not mean one in which part of any number of the school
districts of the state lacked teachers, buildings, or equipment.’
       “***
       “This court, therefore, intimated in Miller v. Korns [(1923), 107 Ohio St.
287, 140 N.E. 773], that the wide discretion granted to the General Assembly is not
without limits. For example, in a situation in which a school district was receiving
so little local and state revenue that the students were effectively being deprived of
educational opportunity, such a system would clearly not be thorough and
efficient.” (Footnote omitted.) 58 Ohio St.2d at 386-387, 12 O.O.3d at 338, 390
N.E.2d at 825, quoting Miller, 107 Ohio St. at 298, 140 N.E. at 776.
       {¶ 184} Today, indeed, we have a number of school districts that are starved
for funds. We have school districts that lack adequate buildings and equipment. In
1997, when it is evident that the citizens of Ohio are unable to declare that the
General Assembly is providing a “thorough and efficient” system of public schools
for all of the students in Ohio, it would be irresponsible for this court to refuse to
decide this question under the guise of calling it a “nonjusticiable political
question.”
       {¶ 185} I join Justice Douglas’s concurring opinion, in which he finds that
education is a fundamental right. I wish to emphasize, however, that education
need not be equal or substantially equal in all districts. Rather, there must be a
threshold amount of funding provided by the state which affords each district in
Ohio the ability to meet certain standardized requirements. It should be recognized




                                          96
                                January Term, 1997




that districts may provide for their students above and beyond the state’s
responsibility.
       {¶ 186} The dissent notes the great strides the General Assembly has made
in funding education in Ohio since Walter. Yet the General Assembly does not
know the actual per-pupil cost of education in Ohio, since it has not calculated the
cost of a quality education since 1973-1974. Moreover, while educational funding
has increased since Walter was decided, it is no longer based on an explicit
assessment of the cost of a high-quality education. Education is funded as a residual
after other mandated programs are funded.
       {¶ 187} The dissent states that “evidence demonstrates that the General
Assembly has discharged its constitutional duty for funding a ‘thorough and
efficient’ system.” The question to be answered after reviewing all of the evidence
is whether a thorough and efficient system exists in a school district where some
students are taught in a former coal bin, or where there are not enough books for
each child, or where the science lab has no gas valves or running water, or where
handicapped children are carried up and down stairs because the buildings are not
accessible to wheelchairs, or where the buildings are structurally unsafe, have
inadequate plumbing, or are without sanitary or indoor restrooms, or where the
school buildings cannot be rewired for computers until an asbestos hazard has been
eliminated. This is not a close question. The answer is obvious. From this list
alone, it is evident that the General Assembly has failed in its constitutional duty to
provide a “thorough and efficient” system of schools throughout Ohio.
       {¶ 188} It is estimated that it will take $10 billion to reestablish adequate
school facilities throughout the state. But the problem is not only facilities that are
inadequate or in poor condition. In addition, it is all of the other myriad problems,
including the lack of honors programs, language courses, and other electives in
property-poor school districts, that put many of Ohio’s children at a disadvantage
when they try to enter colleges.




                                          97
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




        {¶ 189} It cannot be emphasized enough that a thorough and efficient
system of common schools does not require uniformity or equality of all schools.
Contrary to the dissenting opinion, equality is not the purpose of this case. Rather,
the General Assembly is required by our state’s Constitution to provide a quality
and adequate education for all of Ohio’s school students. It must assure every child
of the right to enter a structurally safe building, which is staffed with sufficient
teachers, and contains enough textbooks and equipment so that the child can
develop self-esteem and intellectual abilities. Until this constitutional threshold has
been met in each and every school in Ohio, a thorough and efficient school system
will not exist.
        {¶ 190} The General Assembly must first determine the cost of a basic
quality education in both primary and secondary schools in Ohio, and then ensure
sufficient funds to provide each student with that education, realizing that local
property taxes can no longer be the primary means of providing the finances for a
thorough and efficient system of schools. Continued reliance on property taxes for
the majority of school finances will simply preserve the status quo of inadequacy
and deny the students in property-poor school districts a thorough and efficient
education.
        DOUGLAS, J., concurs in the foregoing concurring opinion.
                               __________________
        PFEIFER, J., concurring.
        {¶ 191} I join the majority of this court in concluding that the current school
funding system violates the Thorough and Efficient Clause of the Ohio
Constitution.     The School Foundation Formula and related statutes do not
adequately smooth out the unconscionable funding inequities that exist between
school districts in this state. These disparities in funding are direct evidence of a
system that is inefficiently designed and administered.




                                          98
                                January Term, 1997




       {¶ 192} Even within a single county, disparities can be remarkable. For
example, the actual tax yield per pupil per operating mill in Cuyahoga County
ranges from $581.57 in Cuyahoga Heights to $21.06 in East Cleveland. In 1994,
the year from which these figures were taken, it required over twenty-seven mills
in East Cleveland to yield what one mill yielded in Cuyahoga Heights.
       {¶ 193} In Trumbull County, the property valuation per pupil ranges from
$194,649 in Lordstown Local to $42,297 in McDonald Local. In Clermont County,
the property valuation per pupil ranges from $254,365 in New Richmond to
$33,283 in Felicity-Franklin. New Richmond received more state aid per pupil than
over sixty school districts with lower property valuation per pupil.
       {¶ 194} In Cuyahoga Heights and Independence, taxpayers paid an average
of twenty-two mills in 1993 and were able to spend an average of $11,891 per pupil.
In East Cleveland, Lakewood City and Olmsted Falls, taxpayers paid an average of
over seventy-eight mills in 1993 and were able to spend an average of only $5,564
per pupil. Thus, on average, residents of Cuyahoga Heights and Independence paid
less than one third the millage paid in East Cleveland, Lakewood City and Olmsted
Falls but were able to spend over twice as much per pupil.
       {¶ 195} These disparities were not caused by a lack of commitment to
education. The residents of East Cleveland, Lakewood City and Olmsted Falls have
taxed themselves heavily but are handicapped by their low property base. A system
of funding that relies heavily on property taxes while producing such disparities
and further exacerbates the disparities by providing state funds to wealthy school
districts cannot be considered thorough and efficient.
       {¶ 196} The majority opinion examines a constitutional mandate and
determines that the present funding structure fails to meet that mandate. It does
neither more nor less than the syllabus law sets forth.
       {¶ 197} In contrast, the minority would require us to forgo addressing the
issue before us. They would defer the determination of this vital constitutional




                                         99
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




standard to the General Assembly.         This approach would severely limit the
constitutional authority of this court and would, in the long term, harm both the
legislative and judicial branches of government.
       {¶ 198} Moving to the merits, the minority would do nothing. They would
require us to ignore coal bin classrooms, free-floating asbestos fibers, leaking roofs,
and arsenic-laced water and determine that the current system complies with the
Thorough and Efficient Clause. A fair reading of the minority opinion leaves one
with great difficulty imagining a system that would violate the minority’s
understanding of the Thorough and Efficient Clause. In short, the minority gives a
“dead letter” interpretation to the Thorough and Efficient Clause.
       {¶ 199} The concept of providing free compulsory education for every
citizen, while a constitutional mandate, is nevertheless an ongoing experiment.
Public education is a constantly evolving process.
       {¶ 200} The delegates to the constitutional convention of 1850-1851 added
the Thorough and Efficient Clause to the Constitution due to their distinct
disappointment with the General Assembly’s treatment of education at that time.
They intentionally rejected more specific language in favor of the more fluid term
“thorough and efficient.” They expected the measure of “thorough and efficient”
to expand as time passed and the state matured. The delegates placed on their and
each subsequent generation the burden of constantly evaluating whether the
constitutional standard was being met. We honor their foresight by giving life and
meaning to their language.
       {¶ 201} The General Assembly has long been aware that the current funding
structure is constitutionally flawed. It has been impossible to adequately address
the problem because wealthy school districts have staunchly defended the status
quo. This decision rejects the status quo and requires the General Assembly to act.
       {¶ 202} The solution to the problem before us cannot come exclusively
from the legal or political system. The General Assembly cannot write a statute,




                                         100
                                January Term, 1997




and we cannot write an opinion, that requires parents to love their children, to
provide proper nutrition for their children, to challenge and nurture their children,
to read to their children, or to do any number of other things that are vitally
important to the growth and educational development of their children. We can
require the General Assembly to comply with the Constitution of this state by
implementing a funding scheme that secures “a thorough and efficient system of
common schools throughout the state.” Neither the plain language of the Ohio
Constitution nor our collective consciences allow us to do otherwise. We have
accepted our constitutional duty and dispatched it as best we could. We are
confident the General Assembly will do likewise.
                              __________________
       MOYER, C.J., dissenting.
       {¶ 203} Only infrequently are the members of this court required to balance
our appreciation for the principle of separation of powers among the three branches
of government against our desire to use the considerable powers of this court to
mandate action to improve the imperfect. The issue in this very important case is
not whether education in Ohio should be better. All seven members of this court
would agree that in an ideal school setting, all children would be taught in well-
maintained school buildings by teachers with high salaries and would read from the
latest-edition school books. Rather, the question presented is whether specific
financing statutes adopted by the Ohio General Assembly violate the words and
intent of the Ohio Constitution. By its words, the Constitution requires the General
Assembly to “make such provisions, by taxation or otherwise, as *** will secure a
thorough and efficient system of common schools throughout the state.” Section
2, Article VI, Ohio Constitution. We find that the statutes withstand plaintiffs’
constitutional challenge because, rather than abdicating its duty, the General
Assembly has made provisions by the challenged statutes for funding a system of
schools with minimum standards throughout the state. The issues of the level and




                                        101
                              SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




method of funding, and thereby the quality of the system, are committed by the
Constitution to the collective will of the people through the legislative branch.
        {¶ 204} One cannot disagree with the aspirations of the majority to provide
a school system that enables children to “participate fully in society,” that provides
“high quality educational opportunities,” and that “allows its citizens to fully
develop their human potential.” However, the majority relies upon the phrase
“thorough and efficient” to declare Ohio’s education financing system
unconstitutional despite the fact that our Constitution commits the responsibility for
ascribing meaning to the phrase “thorough and efficient” to the General Assembly and
not to this court. The majority of this court, moreover, apparently interprets the
Constitution as requiring that all schools be of the same undefined level of high quality
without relying on any supporting text of the Constitution, and equates imperfect
schools with an unconstitutional system of funding.           We disagree with these
conclusions.
        {¶ 205} We must apply well-established standards before declaring statutes
unconstitutional. Among those established standards is a strong presumption that
enactments of the General Assembly are constitutional. State ex rel. Jackman v.
Cuyahoga Cty. Court of Common Pleas (1967), 9 Ohio St. 2d 159, 161, 38 O.O.2d
404, 405, 224 N.E.2d 906, 908-909. It is not the function of this court to assess the
wisdom or policy of a statute or statutory scheme. Rather, we are limited to
determining whether the General Assembly acted within its legislative power in
enacting that statute. Austintown Twp. Bd. of Trustees v. Tracy (1996), 76 Ohio St.3d
353, 356, 667 N.E.2d 1174, 1175-1177.
        {¶ 206} It has also been recognized that evidence of a long-standing
legislative practice “goes a long way in the direction of providing the presence of
unassailable grounds for the constitutionality of the practice.” United States v.
Curtiss-Wright Export Corp. (1936), 299 U.S. 304, 328, 57 S.Ct. 216, 224, 81 L.Ed.
255, 267. Local property taxes have funded Ohio schools since 1825—before the




                                          102
                                       January Term, 1997




adoption of the Education Clause. Walter, 58 Ohio St.2d at 378, 12 O.O.3d at 333,
390 N.E.2d at 820. Local property taxes were the sole source of funding until 1906.
Id. Nonetheless, the majority dispenses with the state’s14 reliance on this historically
based method of funding, thereby usurping the authority of the General Assembly.
         {¶ 207} A fundamental question in this case is which branch of government
shall decide the issue of what level of funding of public education satisfies the
constitutional standard of “thorough and efficient.” To answer this question we
rely upon common-law tests that have guided the courts in this country since the
first state constitution was adopted over two hundred years ago. For the reasons
that follow we respectfully, and jointly, dissent from the opinion of the majority.
                                                    I
                              Separation of Powers/Justiciability
         {¶ 208} In Federalist Paper No. 47, James Madison stressed the importance
of judges refraining from lawmaking: “Were the power of judging joined with the
legislative *** the judge would then be the legislator.” The Federalist Papers
(1961) 303.
         {¶ 209} In Marbury v. Madison (1803), 5 U.S. (1 Cranch) 137, 177, 2 L.Ed.
60, 73, the court established that “[i]t is emphatically the province and duty of the
judicial department to say what the law is.” The court also pronounced, however,
that the judicial branch does not have the authority to answer “[q]uestions in their
nature political, or which are, by the constitution and laws, submitted to” another
branch of government. Id. at 170, 2 L.Ed. at 168.
         {¶ 210} We conclude that the question of what level of funding satisfies the
constitutional standard of a “thorough and efficient” system of education is a
question of quality that revolves around policy choices and value judgments



14. Throughout this opinion, the defendants-appellees will be collectively referred to as "the state.”




                                                  103
                                  SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




constitutionally committed to the General Assembly. We conclude that defining a
“thorough and efficient” system of education financing is a nonjusticiable question.
         {¶ 211} We do not maintain that this court is without jurisdiction over this
case. Rather, we conclude for the reasons stated infra that we are restrained by the
fundamental principle of separation of powers and the related doctrine of
nonjusticiability from deciding what level of educational quality a “thorough and
efficient” system of public schools requires.
         {¶ 212} Such restraint should be exercised only after the court has decided
a threshold justiciable issue, that is, whether the General Assembly has made
provision by taxation or otherwise to secure a thorough and efficient system of
schools. In view of the clear intention of the delegates to the Constitutional
Convention of 1851, the words of the Constitution and the agreement among the
parties to this case that all plaintiff school districts have met the minimum standards
set by the State Department of Education, we conclude that the justiciable question
has been answered in favor of the defendants.
         {¶ 213} Beyond the threshold question, the term “thorough and efficient” is
a question of quality, which is a political question that the Ohio Constitution leaves
to the legislature to determine.
         {¶ 214} The nonjusticiability of a political question is a function of
separation of powers. Baker v. Carr (1962), 369 U.S. 186, 210, 82 S.Ct. 691, 706,
7 L.Ed.2d 663, 682.15 “The political question doctrine excludes from judicial review

15. Walter discounted the justiciability argument and any reliance on Baker v. Carr, (1962), 369
U.S. 186, 82 S.Ct. 691, 7 L.Ed.2d 663, finding that Baker did not represent the Supreme Court’s
most recent pronouncement on the issue, and “whatever viability this doctrine had was certainly
greatly dampened by the later decision in Powell v. McCormack (1969), 395 U.S. 486, 89 S.Ct.
1944, 23 L.Ed.2d 491.” Walter., 58 Ohio St.2d at 384, 12 O.O.3d at 336, 390 N.E.2d at 823.
          However, recent Supreme Court decisions reveal that Baker is considered the leading case
on justiciability. See United States Dept. of Commerce v. Montana (1992), 503 U.S. 442, 112 S.Ct.
1415, 118 L.Ed.2d 84 (relying on Baker to find issue presented did not warrant invocation of
political question doctrine); Nixon v. United States (1993), 506 U.S. 224, 113 S.Ct. 732, 122 L.Ed.2d
1 (relying on Baker to define a nonjusticiable controversy). Additionally, the Nixon court’s
explanation of Powell’s holding thwarts the Walter court’s view of that case. Powell, the Nixon




                                                104
                                      January Term, 1997




those controversies which revolve around policy choices and value determinations
constitutionally committed for resolution to the halls of [the legislature] or the
confines of the Executive Branch. The Judiciary is particularly ill suited to make
such decisions, as ‘courts are fundamentally underequipped to formulate national
[or state] policies or develop standards for matters not legal in nature.’” Japan
Whaling Assn. v. Am. Cetacean Soc. (1986), 478 U.S. 221, 230, 106 S.Ct. 2860,
2866, 92 L.Ed.2d 166, 178, quoting United States ex rel. Joseph v. Cannon
(C.A.D.C. 1981), 642 F.2d 1373, 1379.
         {¶ 215} The fact that this lawsuit implicates other branches of government,
or has political overtones, does not automatically invoke the political question
doctrine.    A political question is one that requires policy choices and value
judgments that have been expressly delegated to, and are more appropriately made
by, the legislative branch of government. Japan Whaling Assn., 478 U.S. at 230,
106 S.Ct. at 2866, 92 L.Ed.2d at 178. The doctrine is one of political questions, not
political cases. The doctrine was not designed so that courts might evade their
responsibility to interpret the Constitution and we do not apply it here as a means
of avoiding our constitutional responsibility. Rather, it was designed “to restrain
the Judiciary from inappropriate interference in the business of the other branches




court explained, was “based on the fixed meaning of ‘[q]ualifications’ set forth in Art. I, § 2. The
claim by the House that its power to ‘be the Judge of the Elections, Returns and Qualifications of
its own Members’ [under Art. I, § 5] was a textual commitment of unreviewable authority was
defeated by the existence of this separate provision specifying the only qualifications which might
be imposed for House membership.” (Emphasis sic.)
          In contrast, the Ohio Constitution does not provide a fixed meaning of “thorough and
efficient.” In fact, a review of other sections in Article VI of the Ohio Constitution reveals that
instead of providing a fixed meaning of “thorough and efficient,” the Constitution grants the General
Assembly even broader discretion in education matters. See Section 1, Article VI; Section 3, Article
VI. Nor is the phrase “thorough and efficient” susceptible of a fixed meaning. Matters of education
are fluid and subject to changing conditions and ideas. Most important, education matters inherently
involve policy choices that are inappropriate for determination by the judiciary.




                                                105
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




of Government.” (Emphasis added.) United States v. Munoz-Flores (1990), 495
U.S. 385, 394, 110 S.Ct.1964, 1970, 109 L.Ed.2d 384, 396.
       {¶ 216} The words of the Ohio Constitution commit to the General
Assembly, not the courts, the responsibility to fund a “thorough and efficient”
system of public schools. The General Assembly has exercised that power, as Ohio
unquestionably has a system of public schools that is designed and funded to meet
the educational guidelines established through the Department of Education. The
level and method of funding beyond those minimum standards constitute, however,
a nonjusticiable political question.
       {¶ 217} In Baker v. Carr, 369 U.S. at 217, 82 S.Ct. at 710, 7 L.Ed.2d at 686,
the United States Supreme Court identified the characteristics of a political
question: “Prominent on the surface of any case held to involve a political question
is found a textually demonstrable constitutional commitment of the issue to a
coordinate political department; or a lack of judicially discoverable and manageable
standards for resolving it; or the impossibility of deciding without an initial policy
determination of a kind clearly for nonjudicial discretion ***.”
       {¶ 218} In Nixon v. United States (1993), 506 U.S. 224, 228, 113 S.Ct. 732,
735, 122 L.Ed.2d 1, 8-9, the court, in examining the text of the Constitution,
outlined the procedure to follow to determine if an issue was nonjusticiable: Courts
“must, in the first instance, interpret the text in question and determine whether and
to what extent the issue is textually committed [in this instance, to the legislative
branch]. *** [T]he concept of a textual commitment to a coordinate political
department is not completely separate from the concept of a lack of judicially
discoverable and manageable standards for resolving it; the lack of judicially
manageable standards may strengthen the conclusion that there is a textually
demonstrable commitment to a coordinate branch.”
       {¶ 219} In accordance with the Nixon test, our Education Clause commits
to the General Assembly the power to define a “thorough and efficient” system of




                                         106
                                January Term, 1997




schools. Section 2, Article VI states: “The general assembly shall make such
provisions, by taxation or otherwise, as *** will secure a thorough and efficient
system of common schools throughout the state ***.” (Emphasis added.) Once the
constitutional threshold has been met, the Education Clause commits to the General
Assembly the responsibility and authority to determine the financing necessary for
the level of the quality of education.
       {¶ 220} Moreover, the constitutional debates demonstrate that the framers of
the Education Clause believed that establishing specific criteria for constitutionally
required financing of education was best left to the General Assembly. Delegate J.
McCormick, dissatisfied with the amount of money previously appropriated by the
General Assembly, argued in support of an amendment to require a minimum amount
of monetary support in the Constitution. That amendment was rejected. II Report of
the Debates and Proceedings of the Convention for the Revision of the Constitution
of the State of Ohio, 1850-51 (1851) (“Debates”) at 17. Delegate Charles Reemelin
envisioned that "all attempts to create a system would be left to the General
Assembly." Id. at 17. Delegate Van Brown believed that the Education Clause was
of a limited general purpose, that being that “there should be schools; and that the
means for supporting them should be provided; and that the details should all be left
to the General Assembly." Id. at 703.
       {¶ 221} Consistent therewith, this court has held that the General
Assembly’s power over public schools is “plenary.” Hancock Cty. Bd. of Edn. v.
Moorehead (1922), 105 Ohio St. 237, 244, 136 N.E. 913, 915. We have also
recognized that the court has “no responsibility and no authority” over the “wisdom
or the policy of [education] legislation.” State ex rel. Methodist Children’s Home
Assn. of Worthington v. Worthington Village School Dist. Bd. of Edn. (1922), 105
Ohio St. 438, 448, 138 N.E. 865, 868.
       {¶ 222} This finding of a textual commitment to the General Assembly of
the quality of education is further bolstered by a lack of judicially demonstrable or




                                         107
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




manageable standards for determining what constitutes a “thorough and efficient
system of common schools.” Such standards “forestall reliance by [courts] on
nonjudicial ‘policy determinations.’” Immigration & Naturalization Service v.
Chadha (1983), 462 U.S. 919, 942, 103 S.Ct. 2764, 2780, 77 L.Ed.2d 317, 339.
       {¶ 223} For example, it is significant that the plaintiffs themselves offered
neither a constitutional definition of a thorough and efficient system nor direction
regarding constitutional funding of such a system. The majority opinion provides
the General Assembly with minimal guidance in developing a constitutional school
financing system. Aspirational phrases urging that state financing of educational
systems enable citizens to “fully develop their human potential,” and afford “high
quality educational opportunities” are no more amenable to judicial interpretation
or enforcement than is the term “thorough and efficient.”
       {¶ 224} As succinctly stated by the Illinois Supreme Court, “[w]hat
constitutes a ‘high quality’ education, and how it may best be provided, cannot be
ascertained by any judicially discoverable or manageable standards.             The
Constitution provides no principled basis for a judicial definition of high quality.
*** Nor is education a subject within the judiciary’s field of expertise, such that a
judicial role in giving content to the education guarantee might be warranted.
Rather the question of education quality is inherently one of policy involving
philosophical and practical considerations that call for the expertise of legislative
and administrative discretion.” (Emphasis added.) Commt. for Educational Rights
v. Edgar (1996), 174 Ill.2d 1, 28-29, 672 N.E.2d 1178, 1191.
       {¶ 225} The Rhode Island Supreme Court similarly recognized inherent
problems when the judiciary undertakes to decide education matters. “What
constitutes an appropriate education or even an ‘equal, adequate, and meaningful’
one, is ‘not likely to be divined for all time even by the scholars who now so
earnestly debate the issues.” Pawtucket v. Sundlun (R.I. 1995), 662 A.2d 40, 58,




                                        108
                                   January Term, 1997




quoting San Antonio Indep. School Dist. v. Rodriguez (1973), 411 U.S. 1, 43, 93
S.Ct. 1278, 1302, 36 L.Ed.2d 16, 49.
        {¶ 226} Plaintiffs’ own expert acknowledged the policy-based nature of
education decisions when he said that “the foundation level reflects political and
budgetary considerations at least as much as it reflects a judgment as to how much
money should be spent on K-12 education.” (Emphasis added in part.)
        {¶ 227} These     policy     decisions—political,     budgetary     and     value
judgments—are inextricable from education matters, requiring a balancing of
interests that are textually and traditionally committed to the General Assembly,
and the General Assembly, not this court, is the proper forum in which competing
taxation, budgetary and spending decisions are made. The judicial branch is simply
neither equipped nor empowered to make these kinds of decisions.
        {¶ 228} The language of the Education Clause, the history surrounding its
adoption, and our precedent (including Miller v. Korns, supra, 107 Ohio St. 287, 140
N.E.2d 773, upon which the majority relies) all uniformly suggest that determination
of educational funding adequacy is the responsibility of the General Assembly. In
both Miller and Cincinnati School Dist. Bd. of Edn. v. Walter (1979), 58 Ohio St.2d
368, 387, 12 O.O.3d 327, 338, 390 N.E.2d 813, 825, the court left the terms
“thorough” and “efficient” undefined in deference to the principle that the Ohio
Constitution entrusts the definition of those terms to the General Assembly.
        {¶ 229} Although we may personally favor it, it is not this court's place to
order the General Assembly to give education "high priority" in its budget allocations,
any more than it is our place to set policy or prioritize the allocation of funds to other
state programs. Members of the legislative branch represent the collective will of the
citizens of Ohio, and the manner in which public schools are funded in this state is a
fundamental policy decision that is within the power of its citizens to change. Under
our system of government, decisions such as imposing new taxes, allocating public
revenues to competing uses, and formulating educational standards are not within the




                                           109
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




judiciary’s authority. As noted by the United States Supreme Court in Rodriguez, "the
ultimate solutions [to perceived problems associated with school funding systems]
must come from the lawmakers and from the democratic pressures of those who elect
them." Id., 411 U.S. at 59, 93 S.Ct. at 1310, 36 L.Ed.2d at 58.
       {¶ 230} Moreover, we find it unlikely that the public is ”willing to turn over
to a tribunal against which they have little if any recourse, a matter of such grave
concern to them and upon which they hold so many strong, though conflicting
views. If their legislators pass laws with which they disagree or refuse to act when
the people think they should, they can make their dissatisfaction known at the polls.
*** The court, however, is not so easy to reach *** nor is it so easy to persuade
that its judgment ought to be revised.” Seattle School Dist. No. 1 of King Cty. v.
State (1978), 90 Wash.2d 476, 563-564, 585 P.2d 71, 120 (Rosellini, J., dissenting).
       {¶ 231} In that determinations of educational funding adequacy and quality
are inherently fluid, we believe that the majority's well-intentioned willingness to
enter this fray today will only necessitate more comprehensive judicial involvement
tomorrow as educational theories and goals evolve, conditions throughout the state
change, and the General Assembly responds. The experiences of other states provide
ample proof of the troubled history of litigation that ensues when the judiciary
deems itself to be the ultimate authority in setting educational funding mechanisms
and standards, as revealed by the following citations:     New Jersey: Robinson v.
Cahill (1973), 62 N.J. 473, 303 A.2d 273 ("Robinson I"), followed by Robinson v.
Cahill (1973), 63 N.J. 196, 306 A.2d 65 ("Robinson II"); Robinson v. Cahill (1975),
67 N.J. 35, 335 A.2d 6 ("Robinson III"); Robinson v. Cahill (1975), 67 N.J. 333, 339
A.2d 193 ("Robinson IV"); Robinson v. Cahill (1976), 69 N.J. 449, 355 A.2d 129
("Robinson V"); Robinson v. Cahill (1976), 70 N.J. 155, 358 A.2d 457 ("Robinson
VI"); Robinson v. Cahill (1976), 70 N.J. 464, 360 A.2d 400 ("Robinson VII"); Abbott
v. Burke (1985), 100 N.J. 269, 495 A.2d 376 ("Abbott I"), followed by Abbott v. Burke
(1990), 119 N.J. 287, 575 A.2d 359 ("Abbott II"); Abbott v. Burke (1994), 136 N.J.




                                         110
                               January Term, 1997




444, 643 A.2d 575 ("Abbott III"); Texas: Edgewood Indep. School Dist. v. Kirby (Tex.
1989), 777 S.W.2d 391 ("Edgewood I"), followed by Edgewood Indep. School Dist.
v. Kirby (Tex. 1991), 804 S.W.2d 491 ("Edgewood II"); Carrollton-Farmers Branch
Indep. School Dist. v. Edgewood Indep. School Dist. (Tex. 1992), 826 S.W.2d 489
("Edgewood III"); California: Serrano v. Priest (1971), 5 Cal.3d 584, 96 Cal.Rptr.
601, 487 P.2d 1241 ("Serrano I"), followed by Serrano v. Priest (1977), 18 Cal.3d
728, 135 Cal.Rptr. 345, 557 P.2d 929 ("Serrano II"); Serrano v. Priest (Cal. App.
1986), 226 Cal. Rptr. 584 ("Serrano III"); Butt v. State (1992), 4 Cal.4th 668, 15
Cal.Rptr.2d 480, 842 P.2d 1240; Connecticut: Horton v. Meskill (1977), 172 Conn.
615, 376 A.2d 359 ("Horton I"), followed by Horton v. Meskill (1982), 187 Conn.
187, 445 A.2d 579 ("Horton II"); Horton v. Meskill (1985), 195 Conn. 24, 486 A.2d
1099 ("Horton III"); Sheff v. O'Neill, supra, 238 Conn. 1, 678 A.2d 1267. Each of
these cases from other states represents the grim reality of a state supreme court
involving itself in setting minimum educational standards, which has resulted in
years of protracted litigation, ultimately placing the courts in the position of
determining state taxation methods, budgetary priorities and educational policy.




                                        111
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




                                          II
                                   Failure of Proof
       {¶ 232} Although fundamental principles of separation of powers and
constraints on judicial review should have, but have not, guided the disposition of
this very important case, we nevertheless proceed to analyze the issues as presented
by the parties.
       {¶ 233} The majority retreats from our long-established judicial deference to
the determination by the legislative branch of educational funding adequacy and
quality, while providing virtually no guidance to the General Assembly as to what the
adequate levels of constitutional funding might be. Borrowing the words of another
jurist in an analogous case, "if I were a member of either the executive or legislative
branch of our government, I would have but the slightest glimmering of what kind of
legislation would comport with the majority's mandate ***." Sheff v. O'Neill, supra,
238 Conn. at 128, 678 A.2d at 1329 (Borden, J., dissenting).
                                          A
                                     The Record
       {¶ 234} In view of the reliance of the plaintiffs and the majority upon
anecdotal evidence of conditions of some schools districts, it is important to
emphasize that the record also reveals compelling evidence supporting our
conclusion that the plaintiffs did not meet their burden of proving that the General
Assembly has failed to establish and fund a thorough and efficient system of
education. Rather than supporting the conclusion that the General Assembly has
totally abdicated the responsibilities imposed upon it by the Education Clause, the
record demonstrates that, in recent years, the General Assembly has responded to
unfavorable conditions in some Ohio schools by providing a significant infusion of
additional funds to primary and secondary education, particularly in those districts
most in need. Examination of recent General Assembly initiatives supports the




                                         112
                                January Term, 1997




conclusion that that body is moving to ensure adequacy and reduce inequalities of
educational opportunity in Ohio.
          {¶ 235} Plaintiffs’ own expert testified that in one survey, Ohio ranked
eleventh among the fifty states in per-pupil educational spending according to one
measure, and fourteenth by another. Since 1980, increases in the foundation level of
state support have outpaced the rate of inflation by sixty percent. During the 1980s,
the state’s share of education funding increased from thirty-seven to forty-seven
percent     of total educational spending. In July 1991, Am.Sub.H.B. No. 298
appropriated money for "equity aid" to ameliorate disparity between the richest and
poorest districts. Id. at Section 59.02, paragraph entitled “School Finance Equity,”
144 Ohio Laws, Part III, 3987, 4551. This aid totaled approximately $45 million to
the poorest two hundred eighteen school districts in Ohio in fiscal year 1993. It was
distributed pursuant to R.C. 3317.0213 and 3317.0214. Sub.H.B. 671, Section 2, 144
Ohio Laws, Part IV, 6062, 6064. Thereafter, this supplemental equity aid increased
to approximately $60,000,000 in fiscal year 1994, $75,000,000 in fiscal year 1995,
$90,000,000 in fiscal year 1996, and $100,000,000 in fiscal year 1997. Am. Sub.H.B.
No. 152, Section 36, line item 200-500, and Section 36.06, 145 Ohio Laws, Part III,
4400, 4417; 1995 Am.Sub.H.B. No. 117, Section 45, line item 200-500. Since this
case was tried in 1993, the state school foundation level has increased from $2,871 to
$3,500 per pupil. Am.Sub.H.B. No. 152, Section 36.12, 145 Ohio Laws, Part III,
4432-4433; R.C. 3317.022(A).
          {¶ 236} At the time of trial, new technology grant legislation totaling
approximately $5 million had been enacted to provide funds to Ohio schools for
purchases of computers and associated equipment. Sub.H.B. No. 671, Sections 4 and
5, 144 Ohio Laws, Part III, 6064. Since trial, additional school technology initiatives
have been enacted, resulting in appropriations of $95 million in the 1995-1996 capital
appropriations bill (Am.Sub.H.B. No. 790, Sections 30-33, 145 Ohio Laws, Part IV,
7681-7683), $125 million in the 1996-1997 budget bill (1995 Am.Sub. H.B. No. 117,




                                         113
                                   SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




Section 45, line item 200-698 and Section 45.36), and an additional $150 million for
the 1997-1998 capital appropriations bill (1996 Am.H.B. No. 748, Section 21).
         {¶ 237} One expert testified that it was “virtually indisputable” that Ohio’s
system of school finance was more equitable in 1991 than in 1979 when Walter was
decided. The trial court expressly found less of a relationship between current
expenditures per pupil and assessed valuation per pupil in school year 1988-1989 than
in either of school years 1980-1981 or 1982-1983, demonstrating increased equality.
Similarly, state basic aid in 1991 was more strongly distributed in inverse proportion
to assessed valuation per pupil than in 1979.
         {¶ 238} The current foundation program does, in fact, narrow the gap between
educational spending in rich and poor districts. In poor districts, state aid may
represent as much as eighty percent of the foundation amount provided to the district.
         {¶ 239} In 1993, the pupil-teacher ratio in Ohio public schools was the
eighteenth lowest ratio in the country. Snyder & Hoffman, State Comparisons of
Education Statistics: 1969-70 to 1993-94 (1995 U.S. Department of Education) 18,
Figure 9.
         {¶ 240} Thus, the evidence demonstrates that the General Assembly has
discharged its constitutional duty for funding a “thorough and efficient” system.
                                                  B
                                     Equality and Adequacy
         {¶ 241} Plaintiffs contend that "thorough and efficient system" means a
system which guarantees equality and adequacy in public education in Ohio.16 The


16. The majority has stated that the General Assembly is not required to create a new financing
system that “must provide equal educational opportunities for all.” However, the majority has
remanded this cause to the trial court, which is to retain jurisdiction until legislation in conformity
with the majority opinion is enacted. The trial judge found and the plaintiffs argued in this court
that the Constitution does require equality of educational opportunities. Because the majority
opinion requires a “complete systematic overhaul,” “an entirely new school financing system” and
that “the establishment, organization and maintenance of public education are the state’s
responsibility,” we believe it is necessary to discuss the arguments that relate to equality and
adequacy.




                                                 114
                                 January Term, 1997




plaintiffs contend, first, that the state's public school financing scheme violates a
constitutional requirement of equal educational opportunity and, second, that the state
has failed to ensure that a constitutionally required minimum standard of education
has been met.
        {¶ 242} Plaintiffs’ two-pronged argument reflects those made in recent school
funding cases litigated throughout the country. See McUsic, The Use of Education
Clauses in School Finance Reform Litigation (1991), 28 Harv. J. Leg. 307, 308-309;
Enrich, Leaving Equality Behind: New Directions in School Finance Reform (1995),
48 Vanderbilt L.Rev. 101, 104 et seq. In that equality and adequacy are entirely
separate concepts, a proper resolution of the cause before us depends upon separate
analysis of those two concepts in light of the requirements imposed by the Education
Clause of the Ohio Constitution.
                                            1
                                        Equality
        {¶ 243} The state does not dispute that disparity exists in the funding of
elementary and secondary public schools among Ohio school districts. The state
concedes that public schools throughout the state differ widely, e.g., in available
course offerings, quality of school facilities and other resources, and available
extracurricular activities.   The parties do dispute, however, whether the Ohio
Constitution permits these disparities to exist.
        {¶ 244} In arguing that the Education Clause requires equality, plaintiffs
contend that each Ohio child has a fundamental right to compete on a "level playing
field" of educational opportunity with all other Ohio children. The trial court accepted
this line of argument, and held that the Education Clause imposed upon the General
Assembly a duty to create a system of education “that will allow students to be
educated at similar levels and provide students with similar opportunities for growth




                                           115
                                  SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




and educational benefits." (Emphasis added.)17 The state, in contrast, argues that the
requirement of a thorough and efficient system of public education simply does not
include equality.
         {¶ 245} In reviewing this clause, this court should follow established
principles of constitutional interpretation. Pivotal in the construction of constitutional,
as well as legislative, provisions is the intention of the drafters. Castleberry v. Evatt
(1946), 147 Ohio St. 30, 33 O.O. 197, 67 N.E.2d 861. Thus, when we interpret a
constitutional provision it is our duty to ascertain the object of the people in adopting
it, and then to give effect to that object. Id. We determine that intention by looking
first to the words used. We then examine the meaning of those words at the time of
their adoption. It is also appropriate to consider the history surrounding adoption of
the provision, if available. See State ex rel. Swetland v. Kinney (1982), 69 Ohio St.2d
567, 23 O.O.3d 479, 433 N.E.2d 217.
         {¶ 246} Having applied those principles, we conclude that plaintiffs'
interpretation of Ohio's Education Clause as requiring equal educational opportunity
for all Ohio schoolchildren is unduly broad, was not intended, and would result in
either an enormous increase in tax support of schools to raise the lowest-funded
districts to the level of the highest-funded districts, or a decrease in funding for the
highest-funded districts so that there is equal funding for all. Neither the language of
the Education Clause itself nor its history justifies the plaintiffs’ contention that our
Constitution requires that all Ohio schoolchildren attend schools that are funded
equally.
         {¶ 247} The plain language of our Education Clause, in contrast to the
language of other state constitutions, makes clear that our Constitution does not



17. The majority does not address the equal protection arguments of the parties and does not declare
that education is a fundamental right subject to strict scrutiny. In these respects, Walter’s holding
survives and we find it unnecessary to discuss the issue.




                                                116
                                 January Term, 1997




include terms expressly requiring equality of educational opportunity. Cf. Section
1(1), Article X, Montana Constitution (guaranteeing “[e]quality of educational
opportunity" to each person of the state); Section 2(1), Article IX, North Carolina
Constitution (requiring “a general and uniform system of free public schools, ***
wherein equal opportunities shall be provided for all students"); Section I, Article IX,
Florida Constitution ("Adequate provision shall be made by law for a uniform system
of free public schools ***); see, generally, Hubsch, The Emerging Right to Education
Under State Constitutional Law (1992), 65 Temp. L. Rev. 1325, 1343 -1348.
       {¶ 248} The Ohio Constitution could have been drafted with similar language.
It was not. And surely sometime during the past one hundred forty years, the citizens
of Ohio could have amended their Constitution to require that all public schools be
equally funded. They have not.
       {¶ 249} In our view, the plaintiffs rely too heavily on the comments of
individual delegates to the constitutional convention in determining intent, rather than
looking to what the convention as a whole agreed to following full debate. Analysis
of the history surrounding the drafting of the Ohio Constitution leads to the conclusion
that it was not the majority intent in adopting the Education Clause to guarantee
equality of educational opportunity. This conclusion is supported most directly by the
express rejection of proposed amendments to the Constitution which would have had
just such an effect. For example, Delegate J. McCormick proposed that all state and
local funds generated throughout the state be consolidated and distributed equally
among all the schoolchildren of the state. Debates at 17. In opposition, Delegate D.P.
Leadbetter spoke against "any attempt to equalize by consolidation the local funds of
the State, [in that it] would enlist numbers against the Constitution, who would drag
it down in spite of the efforts of its friends." Id. The proposal was defeated.
       {¶ 250} Similarly, at the time the Education Clause was adopted, the length
of the school year varied throughout the state. In some areas, school sessions lasted
only three months while other areas provided school years in excess of six months.




                                          117
                               SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




Id. at 703-704. A proposal was made, and defeated, that the new Constitution require
that all Ohio schools be open a minimum of six months of the year. In rejecting the
proposed amendment, the delegates clearly sanctioned a system where educational
opportunity varied from place to place throughout the state, convincingly rebutting
the argument that the framers intended the Education Clause to require equality.
        {¶ 251} Some courts, including the trial court in this case, have held that the
history surrounding use of the words "thorough" or "efficient" in state constitutional
education clauses justifies the conclusion that those clauses must provide statewide
equality of opportunity. See, e.g., Robinson v. Cahill, supra, 62 N.J. at 513, 303 A.2d
at 294; Edgewood, supra, 777 S.W.2d at 394-397; Rose v. Council for Better Edn.
(Ky. 1989), 790 S.W.2d 186, 205-206.
        {¶ 252} We simply are unable to stretch the commonly understood meaning
of "thorough and efficient" to include “equality.”
        {¶ 253} The majority interprets the Education Clause as imposing a duty upon
the state to provide a system of public education. We concur with that premise, but
do not believe, nor do we believe the majority intends to hold, that the Education
Clause thereby precludes individual local school districts from supplementing state
funds in pursuit of the goal of seeking educational excellence. Nonetheless, by
concluding that “the establishment, organization and maintenance of public education
are the state’s responsibility” with only incidental reference to the local funding or
management of public schools, the majority has at least impliedly relegated local
control to an insignificant role.
        {¶ 254} The majority opinion and the syllabus law of the case eliminate all
vestiges of the current system by which the state provides its funds to public school
districts—all are declared to be unconstitutional. It follows that the General
Assembly cannot comply with its constitutional mandate by continuing its course
of substantially increasing the flow of funds to poorer school districts and special
funding for specific purposes to all districts. It seems that, although the majority




                                         118
                                January Term, 1997




has not said so, the General Assembly has two options that may satisfy the
plaintiffs’ view of equity in providing an “equal playing field”: (1) The adoption
of a new tax structure that will provide sufficient revenues to bring the school
funding of the poorest districts up to an undefined level of support, or (2) placing a
statutory limit on the ability of some districts to spend what they choose to spend
on public education.
       {¶ 255} We note that in New Jersey the legislative response to judicially
mandated equalization “has been to increase spending in special needs districts
while limiting spending in wealthier districts” to put a cap on school spending.
Neptune Twp. Bd. of Edn. v. Neptune Twp. Edn. Assn. (1996), 144 N.J. 16, 675
A.2d 611. Nothing could be more ironic than if our holding today were to reduce
the quality of Ohio’s best public schools in the interest of raising the quality of
those most in need of improvement.
       {¶ 256} There is no public good in achieving funding equality if the new
statewide standard is a forced equalization of funding that prohibits the residents of
one school district from spending as much as they wish to educate their children in
order that public school districts be “equal.” Under such circumstances, those
inclined to purchase an educational edge for their children may well devote their
excess resources to private, rather than public, education. In the end, equalization
of funding of public schools would not end wealth-based disparity; it would merely
reestablish the economic lines on which that disparity exists. Even the majority
asserts that wealthy school districts should be allowed to augment their own
programs.
       {¶ 257} Although there is a range of per pupil spending from $3,500 to
$12,000, such variances do not necessarily mean that low-spending districts spend too
little. Arguably, such disparities exist because some communities choose to spend
more. The state itself acknowledges that the vigorous legislative attention to the
problems of the most needy of Ohio schools must continue. Plaintiffs have not




                                         119
                              SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




submitted evidence of the per-pupil cost of adequately educating an Ohio schoolchild.
How can we declare a system of funding public education to be unconstitutional when
none of the parties even attempt to prove what would constitute such a system?
                                           2
                                       Adequacy
        {¶ 258} Plaintiffs assert that implicit in the phrase "thorough and efficient
system" is a requirement that each Ohio school child be afforded the opportunity to
receive an "adequate" education. They contend that Ohio's current system of funding
primary and secondary education has resulted in school districts in Ohio being so
grossly underfunded as to force those districts to offer educational opportunity which
can only be described as inadequate. They equate adequacy of educational opportunity
with availability of education of high quality.
        {¶ 259} In contrast, the state contends that the Education Clause requires the
General Assembly only to provide each public school student with an opportunity to
receive a basic education. Inherent in its argument, and consistent with our holding
in Walter, is the premise that the constitutional phrase "thorough and efficient" cannot
be deemed to impose a duty to provide a "quality" education if the term "quality" is
used to mean more than the basic education required by the minimum standards
formalized in the Ohio Administrative Code. See Ohio Adm.Code Chapter 3301-35.
The educational minimum standards established by the Department of Education are
incorporated into the Administrative Code, and carry the force of law, and are
consistent with the mandate of the Education Clause that the opportunity to obtain a
basic education be afforded every Ohio child.
        {¶ 260} The majority requires the General Assembly to provide sufficient
funding by taxation or otherwise to ensure that all schools are safe, in good repair, and
adequately supplied, and in compliance with all applicable laws. But, while these
criteria seem more closely aligned with the state's position that adequacy requires only
a basic education, the majority further advises that Ohio's children should be educated




                                          120
                                  January Term, 1997




so that they are “able to participate fully in society" and to "fully develop their human
potential." It would be difficult to disagree with such laudable goals for any school
system, public or private. But if it is the majority's intent to incorporate these standards
into constitutional requirements, it is equally difficult to imagine the creation of any
funding system that would pass constitutional muster.
        {¶ 261} The majority notes that some components of the existing system
constitute "weaknesses." But surely the existence of weaknesses in a legislatively
devised funding system cannot be the basis of a finding of unconstitutionality.
        {¶ 262} We agree with the majority’s conclusion that the framers of our
Constitution deemed the providing of education to every Ohio child to be of great
importance to the state's future, and intended to guarantee that every Ohio child have
an opportunity to receive an adequate education.
        {¶ 263} Defining adequacy, however, requires consensus as to the purposes
education is to serve—Plainly a function legislative in nature. To define adequacy
would presuppose that there is a bottom line of educational quality below which no
school may constitutionally be allowed to fall. That bottom line would have to be
flexible, so that it may change over time with changing conditions.
        {¶ 264} In Rose, supra, 790 S.W.2d 186, the Kentucky court defined an
"efficient system" to include nine minimum characteristics. It found that an efficient
system requires substantially uniform schools throughout the state and the provision
of equal educational opportunities to all Kentucky children. It further found that,
under an efficient system, the Kentucky General Assembly not only has sole
responsibility for funding common schools, but also a duty to monitor the state's
schools "to assure that they are operated with no waste, no duplication, no
mismanagement, and with no political influence." Id. at 213.
        {¶ 265} Reading these extensive requirements into the definition of the single
word "efficient" bears “‘simply the imprimatur of result oriented jurisprudence
cloaked in superfluous reasoning.’" Commt. for Educational Rights v. Edgar, supra,




                                            121
                              SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




174 Ill.2d at 16, 672 N.E.2d at 1188, quoting Note, State Constitutional Law--Public
School Financing--Spending Disparity Between Wealthy School Districts and Poor
Urban School Districts, Caused By Reliance on Local Property Taxes, is Violative of
the "Thorough and Efficient Education" Clause (1991), 21 Seton Hall L. Rev. 445,
480. See, also, Hornbeck v. Somerset Cty. Bd. of Edn. (1983), 295 Md. 597, 632-
639, 458 A.2d 758, 777-780 (collecting cases, and determining, at 632, 458 A.2d at
776, that "[t]o conclude that a 'thorough and efficient' system *** means a full,
complete and effective educational system throughout the State *** is not to require
a statewide system which provides more than a basic or adequate education to the
State's children."). Imposition of such extensive requirements is certainly inconsistent
with the history surrounding adoption of Ohio's Education Clause.
        {¶ 266} Plaintiffs stipulated in the trial court that they were all in compliance
with state minimum standards on their most recent scheduled evaluations. In that "an
Ohio Administrative Code section is a further arm, extension, or explanation of
statutory intent implementing a statute passed by the General Assembly," Meyers v.
State Lottery Comm. (1986), 34 Ohio App.3d 232, 234, 517 N.E.2d 1029, 1031, it
follows that those plaintiff schools met the standard of adequacy established by the
General Assembly at that time. Plaintiffs did not prove that compliance with the
minimum standards then in effect was insufficient to provide an adequate education.
Plaintiffs did not attempt to prove that any graduate of any of the plaintiff school
districts had been refused entrance to college because his or her diploma was
unacceptable.    No Ohio school was shown to have been denied accreditation.
Plaintiffs did not prove that any Ohio child was without a school to attend.
        {¶ 267} Plaintiffs attempted to prove that conditions in some Ohio schools
amounted to educational deprivation. But, as in Walter, plaintiffs did not provide
evidence that any student received fewer than the full number of days of instruction
required by law, and, as in Walter, "the record reveals that several *** school districts
that claim to be ‘starved for funds’ in fact offer programs and services in excess of




                                          122
                                    January Term, 1997




state minimum standards." Walter, 58 Ohio St.2d at 387, 12 O.O.3d at 338, 390
N.E.2d at 825-826.
       {¶ 268} The majority concludes that "[l]ack of sufficient funding can also lead
to poor academic performance," and that "[p]oor performance on the ninth grade
proficiency tests is further evidence that [plaintiff school districts] lack sufficient
funds with which to educate their students."
       {¶ 269} The strength of correlation between expenditures and test results is
subject to debate. By way of example, while plaintiff district Northern Local ranked
in the bottom quarter of all Ohio school districts in total revenue and expenditure per
pupil in 1992, its passage rate on the ninth grade proficiency test has been higher than
the state average. It has been reported that Ohio public school students rank above
the mean of national scores on both the SAT and ACT. Feistritzer, Report Card on
American Education: A State-by-State Analysis 1972-73 to 1992-93 (1993) 18. In
1992, Ohio eighth grade students scored one point higher than the national average of
two hundred sixty-six in mathematics proficiency, and Ohio public school fourth
grade students scored three points above the national average of two hundred sixteen
in reading proficiency.     Snyder & Hoffman, State Comparisons of Education
Statistics: 1969-70 to 1993-94 (1995 U.S. Department of Education) 46 and 48, Tables
15 and 16.
       {¶ 270} Proficiency test results should not be used to measure the sufficiency,
or insufficiency, of educational funding. Proficiency test results are just as easily
correlated with external socio-economic factors, i.e., poverty, unemployment, health,
and degree of family involvement. Again, in the words of Justice Borden, "[a]lthough
schools are important socializing institutions in our democratic society, they cannot
be constitutionally required to overcome every serious social and personal
disadvantage that students bring with them to school, and that seriously hinder the
academic achievement of those students.” Sheff, supra, 238 Conn. at 144, 678 A.2d
at 1336 (Borden, J., dissenting).




                                           123
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




       {¶ 271} There simply is no proof that changing Ohio's funding system or
infusing additional funds will improve education. See, for example, Missouri v.
Jenkins (1995), ___ U.S. ___, ___, 115 S.Ct. 2038, 2055, 132 L.Ed.2d 63, 88, where
the court noted that, despite massive court-ordered expenditures in the Kansas City
school district providing its students with school "facilities and opportunities not
available anywhere else in the country,” those students had not come close to reaching
their maximum potential, and that the “learner outcomes” of those same students were
"at or below national norms at many grade levels."
       {¶ 272} One commentator has concluded that "available evidence suggests
that substantial increases in funding produce only modest gains in most schools."
Clune, New Answers to Hard Questions Posed by Rodriguez: Ending the Separation
of School Finance and Educational Policy by Bridging the Gap Between Wrong and
Remedy (1992), 24 Conn. L.Rev. 721, 726.
       {¶ 273} Moreover, the constitutional mandate that the General Assembly fund
a thorough and efficient system requires only that each Ohio child be given an
opportunity to receive an adequate education. Success in education is not solely the
responsibility of the providers of public education.      Students themselves, their
families, and their local communities bear their own responsibility, inside and outside
the classroom. Students themselves must attend classes and study, and they need
encouragement and support in those efforts.
       {¶ 274} We simply do not find, on this record, that plaintiffs carried their
burden of proving that school districts have been unable to provide students with an
adequate education due to a lack of funds. That being the case, a constitutional
violation has not been proven.
                                          III
                                    Local Control
       {¶ 275} While it is true that the framers of our Education Clause envisioned
educational opportunity for all, the framers contemporaneously acknowledged and




                                         124
                                 January Term, 1997




approved of a statewide educational system in which local districts were primarily
responsible for providing educational opportunity to their children.          When the
Education Clause was adopted, determination of adequacy was dependent upon the
resources available at the local level and the amount local residents were willing to
spend on educating local children. See Debates at 702-704.
        {¶ 276} This court has previously recognized that inherent in the concept of
local control is the freedom to "devote more money to the education of one's children."
Walter, 58 Ohio St.2d at 377, 12 O.O.3d at 331, 390 N.E.2d at 820. Equally inherent
in the concept of local control is the freedom of local taxpayers to devote less money
to local education. So long as it does not deprive children of basic educational
opportunity, that decision is constitutional. Id.
        {¶ 277} The interests of local taxpayers and local schoolchildren may, at
times, conflict. The parties stipulated that less than fifty percent of school tax issues
submitted to local voters passed in 1987 through 1992. Voters in plaintiff Northern
Local school district have defeated no fewer than twelve school levies since 1982, and
one of the plaintiff school districts (Dawson-Bryant) placed no education tax levy on
its ballot between 1980 and 1992 for fear of failure, even though its residents are taxed
at a millage below the state mean.
        {¶ 278} The majority imposes an obligation on the state to rectify the
shortcomings of individual schools when the quality level of education within any
individual district "falls short of the constitutional requirement that the system be
thorough and efficient." However, the Education Clause mandates neither that each
Ohio school be "thorough and efficient" nor that education be “thorough and
efficient.” It requires the General Assembly to establish and fund a thorough and
efficient system of schools. The system is not unconstitutional because individual
school buildings have fallen into disrepair, or because individual school districts face
funding challenges. See Leandro v. N. Carolina (1996), 122 N.C. App. 1, 8-10, 468
S.E.2d 543, 548-549. Nor does proof of such facts necessarily mean that those




                                          125
                              SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




districts have failed to fund and provide an adequate educational opportunity for their
students.
       {¶ 279} Local control of public schools is a pillar of our system which neither
the plaintiffs nor the state wants eliminated. But inherent in local control must be
local responsibility, both on the part of voters, who influence the amount of local
funding of local schools, and of local school boards and administrators, who allocate
available funds.    Where local taxpayers refuse, or are unable, to increase their
property taxes, school boards necessarily are called upon to make hard choices to
reduce costs. See Russell v. Gallia Cty. Local School Bd. (1992), 80 Ohio App.3d
797, 610 N.E.2d 1130 (elimination of busing).           Local control, by definition,
contemplates the exercise of discretion by local school officials to prioritize the
expenditure of funds. While the trial court found that one of the plaintiff school
districts had inadequate funding to meet all minimum standards, the impact of that
conclusion is diminished by the court’s further conclusion that this same district spent
more money on salaries and on improving student-teacher ratios than required by
minimum standards.
       {¶ 280} Local boards of education and administrators have historically been
responsible for allocating funds, setting salaries and fringe benefits, designing
curricula beyond state requirements, and choosing materials and technology.
       {¶ 281} While plaintiffs forcefully argue that the record contains no evidence
of local mismanagement, this simply was not emphasized by either plaintiffs or
defendants in the trial court. That having been said, anyone who has served on a
board of education has experienced the difficult tasks involved in setting priorities
for allocating school district funds -- negotiating employee contracts, adding or
eliminating educational programs, choosing which social services will best meet
the needs of students who come to school ill prepared to learn, and selecting
superintendents and administrative staff. It is our view that all parties to this suit
failed to address one of the most important issues in public education in this state




                                          126
                                  January Term, 1997




or any state -- the prudent management of the substantial tax monies available to
school districts.
                                           IV
                                        Remedy
          {¶ 282} In ordering the elimination of the School Foundation Program and
establishment of a system with less disparity among districts, the majority has
effectively removed other reform alternatives from the General Assembly’s
consideration. We agree with the United States Supreme Court when it observed that
a legislative body has the right to accomplish educational reform "‘one step at a time,
addressing itself to the phase of the problem which seems most acute to the legislative
mind.’" Rodriguez, 411 U.S. at 39, 93 S.Ct. at 1300, 36 L.Ed.2d at 46, quoting
Katzenbach v. Morgan (1966), 384 U.S. 641, 657, 86 S.Ct. 1717, 1727, 16 L.Ed.2d
828, 840.
          {¶ 283} The General Assembly may, for example, decide to increase the
foundation amount while preserving the underlying property-tax-based foundation
system of school funding. Or it may legislate the consolidation of the less efficient
school districts into larger regional districts, or otherwise legislate measures to
increase economies of scale.
          {¶ 284} Even accepting the majority’s conclusion that the current funding
system fails to provide a thorough and efficient system, the General Assembly should
be given all available options as it attempts to design a funding system that will be
deemed constitutional by this court, including keeping, but modifying, the current
system.
          {¶ 285} The majority has determined that the entire system for funding public
education in Ohio is unconstitutional. Yet most of the factual support cited for the
majority’s conclusion relates to the condition of school buildings and other facilities.
Since most of the plaintiffs’ evidence relates to allegations of inadequate school
buildings and facilities, the remedy should be narrowly tailored to those issues.




                                           127
                                 SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




                                           V
                                      Conclusion
        {¶ 286} All parties in this action have acknowledged that the level of funding
education varies throughout the state, and that significant capital deficiencies exist in
some Ohio school buildings and facilities. No one wants a child to attend school in a
building with leaky roofs and inadequate plumbing.
        {¶ 287} However, in the absence of proof of a constitutional violation, the fact
that hard problems require hard solutions does not justify judicial second-guessing of
the educational funding system established by the General Assembly. Regardless of
the appeal of plaintiffs’ policy arguments before this court, their arguments are simply
addressed to the wrong branch of government. Those who believe that the Education
Clause should be changed have procedures available to them by which the
Constitution can be amended.         See Section 1, Article II (establishing right to
referendum).
        {¶ 288} In the final analysis, however, it is as true now as it was at the time of
the adoption of the Education Clause in 1851 that "if enough has not been hitherto
done for education, it is because public sentiment has not demanded it; and if we
attempt to go in advance of that sentiment, we shall not be followed and shall be forced
to retreat." Debates at 16.
        {¶ 289} Our dissent should not be viewed as an endorsement of the status quo.
However, in the absence of a showing that the statutes in question violate the
Constitution, responsibility for correcting the funding of Ohio's educational system
does not rest with this court.
        {¶ 290} As members of the judicial branch of government, we must stop our
inquiry upon reaching the determination that the General Assembly has done what our
Constitution requires it to do. The record before us does not demonstrate that the
General Assembly has failed to comply with its constitutional mandate to “make such




                                           128
                               January Term, 1997




provisions, by taxation or otherwise, as *** will secure a thorough and efficient
system of common schools throughout the state.”
       {¶ 291} We jointly agree that the judgment of the court of appeals should be
affirmed.
       COOK and LUNDBERG STRATTON, JJ., concur in the foregoing dissenting
opinion.
                              __________________




                                       129

§ derolph-ii
title: DeRolph II, 2000
effective: 
legislation: https://www.supremecourt.ohio.gov/rod/docs/pdf/0/2000/2000-ohio-437.pdf
--
[This opinion has been published in Ohio Official Reports at 89 Ohio St.3d 1.]




  DEROLPH ET AL., APPELLEES, v. THE STATE OF OHIO ET AL., APPELLANTS.
                     [Cite as DeRolph v. State, 2000-Ohio-437.]
Constitutional law—Education—Schools—Defendants provided with more time to
        comply with Section 2, Article VI of the Ohio Constitution—Supreme Court
        declines to appoint special master to oversee state’s further efforts to
        comply with Section 2, Article VI—Supreme Court maintains continuing
        jurisdiction with matter continued to June 15, 2001.
1. “[T]he sovereign people made it mandatory upon the General Assembly to
        secure not merely a system of common schools,” but rather a thorough and
        efficient system of common schools. Miller v. Korns (1923), 107 Ohio St.
        287, 297-298, 140 N.E. 773, 776, approved and followed.
2. “The attainment of efficiency and thoroughness in that system” of common
        schools is “expressly made a purpose, not local, not municipal, but state-
        wide.” Id., approved and followed.
3. A thorough system means that each and every school district has enough funds
        to operate. An efficient system means one in which each and every school
        district in the state has an ample number of teachers, sound buildings that
        are in compliance with state building and fire codes, and equipment
        sufficient for all students to be afforded an educational opportunity.
       (No. 99-570—Submitted November 16, 1999—Decided May 11, 2000.)
      APPEAL from the Court of Common Pleas of Perry County, No. 22043.
                                  __________________
        {¶ 1} In DeRolph v. State (1997), 78 Ohio St.3d 193, 677 N.E.2d 733
(“DeRolph I”), at the syllabus, this court determined that “Ohio’s elementary and
secondary public school financing system violates Section 2, Article VI of the Ohio
Constitution, which mandates a thorough and efficient system of common schools
                              SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




throughout the state.” For the background and procedural history of the events that
led up to that opinion, see 78 Ohio St.3d at 193-195, 677 N.E.2d at 734-735.
        {¶ 2} In DeRolph I, this court recognized that a new funding system could
not be crafted and implemented without time and deliberation. Therefore, we
stayed the effect of our decision for twelve months, id. at 213, 677 N.E.2d at 747,
in order to give the General Assembly time to enact remedial legislation. We
remanded the cause to the trial court, ordering the trial court to “retain jurisdiction
until the legislation is enacted and, in effect, taking such action as may be necessary
to ensure conformity with this opinion.” Id.
        {¶ 3} In entries issued after that decision, this court expounded on its order
of remand to the trial court. In particular, in response to a request from the
defendants for clarification and reconsideration of the decision, this court stated
that local property taxes could be part of the revised funding plan, but property
taxes could not be the primary means of funding a thorough and efficient system of
schools. 78 Ohio St.3d 419, 678 N.E.2d 886, 887. Furthermore, this court stated
that, consistent with the DeRolph I decision, upon remand to the trial court the
parties could present evidence regarding the enacted remedy, to establish whether
the remedy satisfied the Thorough and Efficient Clause of the Ohio Constitution.
78 Ohio St.3d at 420-421, 678 N.E.2d at 887-888. The parties could then appeal
the trial court’s ruling directly to this court, for final determination. Id. at 421, 678
N.E.2d at 888.
        {¶ 4} From August 24, 1998 through September 3, 1998, the trial court held
a hearing on the General Assembly’s efforts in the wake of DeRolph I to create a
new funding method. Plaintiffs, who continued to assert that Ohio’s system of
funding public education is unconstitutional, are essentially the same plaintiffs who
pressed that position in DeRolph I. The defendants argued that the revised system
complies with the Ohio Constitution.




                                           2
                                January Term, 2000




       {¶ 5} During the hearing, the trial court propounded inquiries to this court.
This court responded by stating that (1) the remand to the trial court involved the
Thorough and Efficient Clause of the Ohio Constitution and did not involve the
Equal Protection Clause, and (2) the state bore the burden of production and proof
on remand, and was required to show by a preponderance of the evidence that the
Constitution had been satisfied in order to prevail. 83 Ohio St.3d 1212, 699 N.E.2d
518, 518-519.
       {¶ 6} After extensive briefing and the presentation of a great deal of
evidence, the trial court issued its decision on February 26, 1999. The decision,
reported at (1999), 98 Ohio Misc.2d 1, 712 N.E.2d 125, is two hundred sixty-three
pages in length in the Ohio Official Reports. Upon determining that the state had
failed to implement a complete systematic overhaul of Ohio’s school-funding
system, the trial court concluded that the state had failed to meet its burden of proof
that it had complied with the requirements of the Ohio Constitution. Id. at 263, 712
N.E.2d at 297.
       {¶ 7} The cause is now before this court pursuant to the defendants’ appeal
as of right from the trial court decision, under the procedures established in
DeRolph I and subsequent orders of this court.
                               __________________
       Bricker & Eckler, L.L.P., Nicholas A. Pittner, John F. Birath, Jr., Sue
Wyskiver Yount, Quintin F. Lindsmith and Susan B. Greenberger, for appellees.
       Betty D. Montgomery, Attorney General, Mary Lynn Readey, Roger F.
Carroll and James G. Tassie, Assistant Attorneys General; Jones, Day, Reavis &
Pogue and Jeffrey S. Sutton; Dinsmore & Shohl, L.L.P., and Joel S. Taylor, for
appellants.
       Joseph P. Sulzer, urging affirmance for amici curiae members of the Ohio
House of Representatives John R. Bender, Jack Ford, Barbara C. Pringle, Daniel
Metelsky, Charles A. Wilson, Jr., Troy Lee James, Barbara Boyd, William L. Ogg,




                                          3
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




Tom Roberts, David Hartley, Jerry Krupinski, Sylvester Patton, Jr., Sean D. Logan,
Joe Sulzer, William Healy, June H. Ferderber, Peter Lawson Jones, Dale Miller,
Betty Sutton, Vernon Sykes, Samuel Britton, Dixie J. Allen, Darrell Opfer, Erin
Sullivan, John E. Barnes, Jr., Bryan Flannery, L. George Distel, Jeanine Perry,
Chris Verich, Catherine L. Barrett, Robert Gooding, Joyce Beatty, Ray Miller, and
Shirley A. Smith; and Ohio Senators Ben Espy, Leigh Herrington, Daniel Brady,
Robert F. Hagan, Michael C. Shoemaker, Mark Mallory, and C.J. Prentiss.
       Walter & Haverfield, James E. Betts and Frederick W. Whatley, urging
affirmance for amicus curiae Alliance for Adequate School Funding.
       Raymond Vasvari and Gino J. Scarselli, urging affirmance for amicus
curiae American Civil Liberties Union of Ohio Foundation, Inc.
       Means, Bichimer, Burkholder & Baker Co., L.P.A., Kimball H. Carey and
Katherine A. Francis, urging affirmance for amici curiae Buckeye Association of
School Administrators, Ohio School Boards Association, and Ohio Association of
School Business Officials.
       Patrick F. Timmins, Jr., urging affirmance for amicus curiae Coalition of
Rural and Appalachian Schools.
       Louis B. Geneva Co., L.P.A., and M. Jayne H. Geneva, urging affirmance
for amici curiae Coalition for School Funding Reform, Cleveland Heights-
University Heights City School District, East Cleveland City School District, Grand
Valley Local School District, Lakewood City School District, Shaker Heights City
School District, Waverly City School District, and Coalition for Greater
Cleveland’s Children.
       Courtney Williams, urging affirmance for amicus curiae League of Women
Voters of Ohio.
       Bernard Cohen, urging affirmance for amicus curiae Ohio Association of
Child Caring Agencies.




                                         4
                                January Term, 2000




       John T. Ryerson, urging affirmance for amicus curiae Ohio Association for
Gifted Children.
       Buckley King & Bluso, Robert J. Walter and Thomas C. Drabick, Jr., urging
affirmance for amicus curiae Ohio Association of Public School Employees
(OAPSE)/AFSCME Local 4, AFL-CIO.
       Christopher Lopez; Kalniz, Iorio & Feldstein Co., L.P.A., Ted Iorio,
Christine A. Reardon and Donato Iorio, urging affirmance for amicus curiae Ohio
Education Association.
       Schnorf & Schnorf Co., L.P.A., David M. Schnorf and Johna M. Bella,
urging affirmance for amicus curiae Ohio Federation of Teachers.
       Ohio Legal Rights Service and Susan G. Tobin, urging affirmance for
amicus curiae Ohio Legal Rights Service.
       Ennis, Roberts & Fischer and C. Bronston McCord III, urging affirmance
for amicus curiae West Clermont Local School District Board of Education.
       John M. Haseley, urging affirmance for amicus curiae United States
Congressman Ted Strickland.
       Chester, Willcox & Saxbe and John J. Chester, urging reversal for amicus
curiae Governor Bob Taft.
       Benesch, Friedlander, Coplan & Aronoff, L.L.P., and N. Victor Goodman,
urging reversal for amici curiae Richard H. Finan, President of the Ohio Senate,
and Jo Ann Davidson, Speaker of the Ohio House of Representatives.
                               __________________
       ALICE ROBIE RESNICK, J.
                                          I
                    BACKGROUND AND INTRODUCTION
       {¶ 8} In DeRolph I, after an exhaustive review of the evidence, a majority
of this court concluded that Ohio’s system of primary and secondary public schools
in place at that time fell well short of the mandate of Section 2, Article VI. DeRolph




                                          5
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




I recognized that, despite the earnest efforts of the General Assembly, it was simply
impossible to characterize the existing system as “thorough and efficient.”
Accordingly, this court declared the system unconstitutional and stated that the
General Assembly must devise and implement a new “thorough and efficient”
system.
       {¶ 9} Now, this court is called upon to consider the same basic
constitutional question that was before us in DeRolph I—Can the revised system
be characterized as thorough and efficient pursuant to Section 2, Article VI of the
Ohio Constitution? Although the key inquiry is the same, the specifics of that
inquiry have changed commensurately with the state’s attempts to institute the
necessary reforms. Therefore, realizing that legislation involving schools is an
ongoing and ever-changing process as new laws are continuously enacted and
former laws are constantly amended or repealed, it is incumbent upon us to examine
the extent of those reforms to consider whether the mandate of the Constitution has
been satisfied.
       {¶ 10} The benchmark of our inquiry remains the Thorough and Efficient
Clause, as set forth in Section 2, Article VI of the Ohio Constitution:
       “The general assembly shall make such provisions, by taxation, or
otherwise, as, with the income arising from the school trust fund, will secure a
thorough and efficient system of common schools throughout the State * * *.”
       {¶ 11} We reiterate the standard for a thorough and efficient system of
common schools as set out in Miller v. Korns (1923), 107 Ohio St. 287, 297-298,
140 N.E. 773, 776:
       “This declaration is made by the people of the state. It calls for the
upbuilding of a system of schools throughout the state, and the attainment of
efficiency and thoroughness in that system is thus expressly made a purpose, not
local, not municipal, but state-wide.




                                          6
                               January Term, 2000




       “With this very purpose in view, regarding the problem as a state-wide
problem, the sovereign people made it mandatory upon the General Assembly to
secure not merely a system of common schools, but a system thorough and efficient
throughout the state.
       “A thorough system could not mean one in which part or any number of the
school districts of the state were starved for funds. An efficient system could not
mean one in which part or any number of the school districts of the state lacked
teachers, buildings, or equipment.”
       {¶ 12} Furthermore, in Cincinnati School Dist. Bd. of Edn. v. Walter (1979),
58 Ohio St.2d 368, 387, 12 O.O.3d 327, 338, 390 N.E.2d 813, 825, this court
observed that a school system could not be thorough and efficient if any school
district in Ohio “was receiving so little local and state revenue that the students
were effectively being deprived of educational opportunity.” See, also, DeRolph I,
78 Ohio St.3d at 204, 677 N.E.2d at 741, citing both Miller and Walter with
approval.
       {¶ 13} In DeRolph I, 78 Ohio St.3d at 212, 677 N.E.2d at 747, this court
identified four aspects of the school-funding scheme in place at that time that
contributed “to the unworkability of the system and which must be eliminated.”
Those four aspects were “(1) the operation of the School Foundation Program, (2)
the emphasis of Ohio’s school funding system on local property tax, (3) the
requirement of school district borrowing through the spending reserve and
emergency school assistance loan programs, and (4) the lack of sufficient funding
in the General Assembly’s biennium budget for the construction and maintenance
of public school buildings.”
       {¶ 14} This court, in declaring the statutes unconstitutional, stated in
DeRolph I at 213, 677 N.E.2d at 747, that “[b]ecause of its importance, education
should be placed high in the state’s budgetary priorities. A thorough and efficient
system of common schools includes facilities in good repair and the supplies,




                                         7
                              SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




materials, and funds necessary to maintain these facilities in a safe manner, in
compliance with all local, state, and federal mandates.”
        {¶ 15} The defendants claim that they have enacted a package of remedial
legislation that meets and even exceeds the requirement for a system that is both
thorough and efficient. Defendants argue that the decision of the trial court should
be reversed and ask this court to “give the new, ongoing remedy a chance to
succeed.”
        {¶ 16} Plaintiffs, on the other hand, urge this court to find that the state has
fallen woefully short of its obligations to craft a thorough and efficient system.
Plaintiffs argue that this court should affirm the judgment of the trial court, which
was in their favor on every significant point. Furthermore, plaintiffs request that
this court (1) declare that the right to an education is a fundamental right under the
Ohio Constitution, with a corresponding duty on the state to justify any disparities
in the funding system; (2) specify what programs and services must be provided to
children at every level, in order to define what level of educational opportunities
must be made available; (3) retain jurisdiction of the case and direct the parties to
a settlement conference under the supervision of a special master; and (4) issue an
interim funding order that, among other things, requires the state to fund the
foundation level at $5,051 per pupil, updated for inflation from FY99, and also
requires the state to fund school facilities at a minimum level of $1 billion for each
fiscal year.
        {¶ 17} In DeRolph I, 78 Ohio St.3d at 198, 677 N.E.2d at 737, this court
stated that “Ohio’s statutory scheme for financing public education is complex.” In
addition, this court noted that “[s]chool funding has been, and continues to be, a
Herculean task.” Id. at 211, 677 N.E.2d at 746. These remarks apply with equal
force to the system now at issue. In fact, the educational system continues to be
extraordinarily complex, and as evidenced by the record now before us, reforming
that system continues to be a task of unparalleled magnitude. It is impossible to




                                           8
                                 January Term, 2000




overstate the scope of the challenge presented to the state by this case. This case
implicates more than just funding; it also involves other complex intertwined
issues.
          {¶ 18} The General Assembly must give this problem its undivided
attention. If it is not addressed and solved immediately, it will only increase in
magnitude. For example, the 1990 Ohio Public School Facility Survey determined
that Ohio’s public primary and secondary schools then needed $10.2 billion for
building repair and construction. In 1997, the Legislative Budget Office completed
a study and concluded that the need had risen to a staggering $16.5 billion, with the
state’s share estimated to be $7.2 billion and the local share estimated at $9.3
billion. In a 1996 report of the United States General Accounting Office, Ohio was
ranked very near the bottom among the states in many categories regarding the
condition of its school facilities, and was ranked dead last among the states in
percentage of schools with at least one inadequate building feature. Furthermore,
Ohio was ranked forty-eighth among the fifty states in percentage of schools
reporting the need to spend money to repair or upgrade schools to good overall
condition, with more than ninety-five percent of Ohio schools needing to spend for
that improvement. In a report released in March 2000 concerning construction
expenditures for school facilities, the General Accounting Office found that the
national average annual state construction expenditure per student for FY90
through FY97 was $473. Ohio ranked fortieth among the states, with an average
annual expenditure for the time period of $274 per student. School Facilities,
Construction Expenditures Have Grown Significantly in Recent Years,
GAO/HEHS-00-41 (Mar. 3, 2000) 29-30.
          {¶ 19} Other statistics also illustrate the magnitude of the school-funding
challenge. There are six hundred eleven separate school districts in this state and
forty-nine joint vocational school districts. There are approximately 1.8 million
school children in primary and secondary public schools in Ohio and approximately




                                           9
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




one hundred eight thousand public school teachers. There are approximately three
thousand nine hundred public school buildings in the state. Appropriations for
primary and secondary education account for about forty percent of the state’s
overall budget for this biennium, with more than $6.5 billion appropriated for FY00
for primary and secondary education out of a total state budget of more than $16.2
billion. For FY01 the appropriation is more than $6.9 billion for primary and
secondary education out of a total state budget of more than $17.2 billion. These
numbers reflect only the share contributed by the state for the funding of primary
and secondary education and do not include the federal and local shares.
       {¶ 20} In FY97, a statewide total of more than $10 billion in local, state,
and federal funds was spent on primary and secondary education. The federal
government’s contribution was approximately six percent of that total. Considering
only the combined state and local revenues of the districts, the state contribution
was about 43.8 percent, and the local share was about 56.2 percent. These statistics
illustrate the accuracy of this court’s observation in DeRolph I, 78 Ohio St.3d at
199, 677 N.E.2d at 738, that “Ohio relies more on local revenue than state revenue,
contrary to the national trend.”
       {¶ 21} The Ohio school-funding system’s reliance on local revenue, chiefly
in the form of local property taxes, is one aspect of the overall system with deep
historical roots. In Ohio, as in many other states, the tradition of using local
property taxes as the primary means to fund public schools has been entrenched
since early statehood. See, e.g., 19 Ohio Laws 51, 55. As we recognized in
DeRolph I, Ohio is just one of many states in recent years to face the fundamental
problems caused by an overreliance on local property taxes.
       {¶ 22} The inherent inequities of funding systems that rely too much on
local property taxes not only are extremely difficult to rectify, but also run counter
to our Constitution’s explicit requirement for a statewide system of public schools.
The valuation of local property has no connection whatsoever to the actual




                                         10
                                January Term, 2000




education needs of the locality, with the result that a system overreliant on local
property taxes is by its very nature an arbitrary system that can never be totally
thorough or efficient. In a very real sense, this problem underlies most of the other
deficiencies in Ohio’s school system and is either the direct or indirect cause of
them. The majority and all three separate concurring opinions in DeRolph I
specifically recognized the inadequacies of a system that is overreliant on local
property taxes.
       {¶ 23} We recognize that the problems associated with school funding
being faced by recent and current sessions of the General Assembly are not of
recent vintage. Many of the current deficiencies in school-funding policies arose
over a long time and are the products of the failure for so many years of legislators
who have long since retired to appropriately place education as a high priority in
the state budget. To a significant degree, current members of the General Assembly
have inherited a problem that has been coming to a head for many years. Our
current legislators must confront problems that General Assembly members of the
past were reluctant to address because education was simply not in the forefront of
public concerns. Education was too often ignored, and issues relating to it were too
often given short shrift.
       {¶ 24} Many factors have contributed in recent years to make what had been
a problematical system into one that has reached crisis proportions throughout the
state. The problems have escalated in part due to “unfunded mandates” imposed
by the state and federal governments, causing the cost of educating our children to
rise dramatically. Even when the state or federal government does fund a particular
program or endeavor, significant associated local costs may be incurred. Increased
costs for numerous programs and needs, such as special education, R.C. 3323.04,
vocational education, R.C. 3313.90, gifted-student programs, R.C. 3313.21,
transportation, R.C. 3327.01, facilities improvements (e.g., asbestos abatement and
wiring for technology, as well as day-to-day maintenance on deteriorating




                                         11
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




buildings), compliance with the Americans With Disabilities Act, Sections 12101
et seq., Title 42, U.S.Code, employee costs (e.g., benefits such as health care, and
for teacher certification, licensing, and development), increased staffing needs
(e.g., additional teachers of science, math, and computer skills, and speech, hearing,
and psychological educational aides), textbooks and supplies, R.C. 3315.17(A),
science labs, computers and other technology purchases, summer school
remediation, dropout-prevention programs, adolescent-pregnancy programs, Head
Start and preschool programs, adult-literacy programs, substance-abuse-prevention
programs, school lunch and breakfast programs, R.C. 3313.813(C), and a myriad
of other things, have exacerbated problems that seem less and less manageable as
total expenditures continually rise within a system impeded by the arbitrariness of
its revenue stream.
       {¶ 25} It is apparent that the task of passing and implementing legislation
involving education is exceedingly complex—studies must be conducted, experts
must be consulted, goals must be formulated, and priorities set. There are many
options to choose from, and deciding upon the best option and then reaching a
consensus are formidable undertakings. In addition, a consensus must be reached
in a climate in which other budgetary considerations are always present, with other
spending priorities constantly lobbying for their own larger pieces of the limited
state budget pie. Political realities, such as an individual legislator’s reelection
concerns, also complicate the effort to devise a fair and adequate system. These
budgetary and political concerns must yield, however, when compliance with a
constitutional mandate is at issue. The task is difficult enough in prosperous times,
when the state’s coffers are full. However, the funding system that is devised must
be solid enough that it can also function in an economic downturn, because a
consistent revenue stream is an absolute necessity for a thorough and efficient
system.




                                         12
                                   January Term, 2000




        {¶ 26} Because the arguments before both the trial court and this court
focused so narrowly on school funding, it is extremely important to recognize that
funding is only one aspect of a thorough and efficient system of schools. We would
be remiss if we failed to acknowledge that thoroughness and efficiency embrace far
more than simply adequate funding. Even if the system were very generously
funded, if other factors are ignored, it might still not be thorough and efficient. If
teachers are ill prepared and students are unaware of what is expected of them, then
our state has failed them. If students have access to the latest technology but cannot
take advantage of it, then our state has failed them. If students have the most up-
to-date textbooks but cannot comprehend the material in those books, then our state
has failed them.
        {¶ 27} The definition of “thorough and efficient” is not static; it depends on
one’s frame of reference. What was deemed thorough and efficient when the state’s
Constitution was adopted certainly would not be considered thorough and efficient
today. Likewise, an educational system that was considered thorough and efficient
twenty-five years ago may not be so today. Moreover, it is impossible to generate
an all-inclusive list that specifically enumerates every possible component of a
thorough and efficient system. In light of this, we offer the following guidance: A
thorough system means that each and every school district has enough funds to
operate. An efficient system is one in which each and every school district in the
state has an ample number of teachers, sound buildings that are in compliance with
state fire and building codes, and equipment sufficient for all students to be afforded
an educational opportunity.
        {¶ 28} In November 1998, former Governor George Voinovich requested a
study by a group of experts, Achieve, Inc.,1 the purpose of which was to provide

1. According to its own description:
         “Achieve, Inc., is an independent, non-profit, bipartisan organization created by the
nation’s governors and business leaders to help them follow up on the commitments made at the
1996 National Education Summit. Its twelve member Board of Directors includes former Governor




                                             13
                                SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




incoming Governor Robert Taft and the new State Superintendent of Education, as
well as legislators and others, a candid assessment of the strengths and weaknesses
of Ohio’s reform strategy. When completed in March 1999, the Achieve, Inc.
Report made the following observations:
        “Ohio can be proud of a substantial set of policy initiatives it has launched
in the 1990s, and of the deepening investments it has made in educational
improvement. Since Fiscal Year 1991, state education funding has increased by
approximately 50 percent, twice the rate of inflation. The increase has been greatest
for low-wealth districts. Legislation already enacted guarantees an additional 40
percent increase in state aid over the next five years.
        “Over and above these increases in general state aid for education, there
have been substantial new investments in early childhood education, technology,
facilities, and urban education, and major policy initiatives to overhaul teacher
education and strengthen public accountability for results. Each of these initiatives
deserves comment, for each could be an important element in a comprehensive state
strategy to close the gap in student and school performance.”
        {¶ 29} In some ways, funding is the most easily quantifiable of the many
factors that play a part in establishing a thorough and efficient system of schools.
When considering the per-pupil spending disparities and the inadequacies in
facilities that have of late characterized our system of schools, it is evident that
some of the most glaring problems are engendered by inadequate funding.
Therefore, remedying those problems is naturally of paramount importance. Yet


Voinovich and John Pepper, Chairman of Procter & Gamble and Chairman of the Ohio Business
Roundtable. Achieve provides advice and assistance to state policy leaders on issues of academic
standards, assessment, and accountability. It has a small staff, augmented by a team of Senior
Associates, and conducts much of its work in partnership with other education and business
organizations. To carry out this review, Achieve drew upon three of its Senior Associates—Denis
Doyle, Diane Ravitch, and Warren Simmons—as well as Susan Traiman, who directs The Business
Roundtable’s education work. The review team was headed by Achieve’s President, Robert
Schwartz, and was assisted by Seth Reynolds, graduate student at Harvard University’s Kennedy
School of Government.”




                                              14
                                 January Term, 2000




all of the other requirements of a thorough and efficient system of education must
be developed along with funding. Ensuring adequate school funding is simply one
of the means to reach the end—with the end being a statewide thorough and
efficient system of schools that is adequately funded and that has statewide
standards for success.
        {¶ 30} Even though remedying the scheme for school funding is not an end
unto itself, it is an important step in establishing the type of school system that the
Constitution requires. No one can ensure that adequate facilities and educational
opportunities will lead to the success of the students of this state. One thing that is
apparent, though, is that substandard facilities and inadequate resources and
opportunities for any of those students are a sure formula for failure.
        {¶ 31} Our decision in DeRolph I required the General Assembly to respond
to the untenable funding situation that had developed over time. Rather than
allowing the status quo to continue, we realized that we could not, in good
conscience, ignore the overwhelming evidence before us that our statewide system
of public schools was simply not a thorough and efficient system. Significant
changes had to be made in the way primary and secondary public education is
funded, and if it took a judgment of this court to make those changes happen, then
so be it.
        {¶ 32} We fully realize that no miraculous alternatives will suddenly appear
and make the General Assembly’s task any easier. In order to create a thorough
and efficient system of statewide common schools, hard choices must be made.
Moreover, because the stakes in this endeavor cannot be overestimated—we are
dealing with the futures of the children of this state and in reality the very future of
our state—the course must be stayed. As past experience has shown, the longer an
inadequate funding system is allowed to continue, the more difficult it is to reform
the system. The General Assembly should not allow the momentum of recent
efforts to be impeded for any reason. Everyone’s cooperation and best efforts are




                                          15
                              SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




required as we strive to ensure that educational opportunities are available to all
children in this great state, not just those residing in affluent suburbs or in well-to-
do neighborhoods.
        {¶ 33} Throughout its history, this case has presented two contradictory
features that have made it difficult for all parties involved, including the courts of
this state, to define the roles of those charged with solving the system’s problems.
On the one hand, the courts of this state are entrusted with the authority to determine
whether a school-funding scheme complies with the Constitution. See DeRolph I
at 198, 677 N.E.2d at 738. However, this court in DeRolph I did not require a
specific funding scheme and did not instruct the General Assembly as to what
legislation should be enacted, leaving it to the General Assembly to determine the
specifics of the remedial legislation. Id. at 212-213, 677 N.E.2d at 747. The reason
for this is the doctrine of separation of powers. The legislature has the power to
draft legislation, and the court has the power to determine whether that legislation
complies with the Constitution. However, while it is for the General Assembly to
legislate a remedy, courts do possess the authority to enforce their orders, since the
power to declare a particular law or enactment unconstitutional must include the
power to require a revision of that enactment, to ensure that it is then constitutional.
If it did not, then the power to find a particular Act unconstitutional would be a
nullity. As a result there would be no enforceable remedy. A remedy that is never
enforced is truly not a remedy.
        {¶ 34} Thus, it might be tempting for this court to do its own analysis, for
example, determining the level of funding per pupil to achieve a thorough and
efficient system, and then ordering that amount of funding. For instance, we
conceivably could simply order, as plaintiffs request, that the foundation amount
be set in excess of $5,000 per pupil for FY00, and order the General Assembly to
fund that amount. However, this court respectfully declines to pursue that course.
That degree of involvement in fashioning a remedy in this case is not, nor should




                                          16
                                January Term, 2000




ever be, how we perceive our role. Our role, as we have declared in past cases, is
to decide issues of constitutionality—not to legislate, as some may believe.
                                         II
                  SUMMARY OF LEGISLATIVE ACTIVITY
       {¶ 35} A substantial amount of legislation has been enacted since DeRolph
I was decided. There are indications that Governor Taft and the General Assembly
have taken some of the steps necessary to remedy a situation that has been neglected
for more than twenty-five years. We now examine the laws that have been enacted
in response to DeRolph I. Before we consider the specifics of the legislation in
context, we summarize the developments that have occurred. The key initiatives
include:
   •   Am.Sub.S.B. No. 102 (“S.B. 102”) (signed into law on May 20, 1997)
created the Ohio School Facilities Commission (see R.C. 3318.30), transferred
responsibility for the Classroom Facilities Assistance Program from the State Board
of Education to that commission, required that commission to establish the
Emergency School Building Repair Program (see R.C. 3318.35), and instituted and
authorized money for the so-called Big Eight Repair Program for major renovations
and repairs of school facilities in some of the largest school districts in the state
(Section 7 of the Act).
   •   Am.Sub.H.B. No. 215 (“H.B. 215”) (the Biennial Budget Bill for FY98 and
FY99, signed into law on June 30, 1997) made adjustments in the basic aid formula
amount (R.C. 3317.022) and made other changes to R.C. Chapter 3317. It also
provided additional equity aid (Section 50.05 of the Act; see R.C. 3317.0213),
additional funding for textbooks (Section 50.16), additional funding for facilities
(Section 188), and additional funding for the SchoolNet (Section 69.01) and
SchoolNet Plus (Section 69.03) programs, as well as creating and providing initial
funding for the Disability Access Program (Sections 50 and 69).




                                         17
                            SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




   •   Am.Sub.S.B. No. 55 (“S.B. 55”) (signed into law on August 22, 1997), the
student and school district “Academic Accountability Bill,” established school
district performance standards (R.C. 3302.02) and school district report cards (R.C.
3302.03), increased high school graduation requirements (R.C. 3313.603), and
instituted a “fourth-grade guarantee,” preventing students who do not pass the
fourth-grade proficiency test from advancing to the fifth grade unless exceptions
apply (R.C. 3313.608).
   •   Sub.H.B. No. 412 (“H.B. 412”) (signed into law on August 22, 1997), the
“School District Fiscal Accountability Act,” requires school districts to maintain
budget reserves (former R.C. 5705.29[K], now R.C. 5705.29[H]) and requires set-
asides for building maintenance (R.C. 3315.18) and textbooks and instructional
materials (R.C. 3315.17), and created the school district solvency assistance fund
(R.C. 3316.20).
   •   Am.Sub.H.B. No. 650 (“H.B. 650”) (signed into law on February 13, 1998)
and Am.Sub.H.B. No. 770 (“H.B. 770”) (signed into law on June 17, 1998) make
up the heart of the General Assembly’s remedy. H.B. 650’s stated purpose is “to
establish a new system for funding education.” H.B. 770, among other things,
modified some of H.B. 650’s provisions. This legislation set out the essence of the
current R.C. Chapter 3317 school-funding formula, including the base cost amount
and the adjustments and subsidies. It also provided money for school facilities.
H.B. 650 at Section 14.
   •   Am.Sub.H.B. No. 850 (“H.B. 850”) (the capital appropriations bill for the
biennium ending June 30, 2000, signed into law on December 17, 1998) provided
money for school facilities, some specified for districts with exceptional needs.
Sections 6 and 26 of the Act.
   •   Am.Sub.H.B. No. 282 (“H.B. 282”) (the biennial Education Budget Bill for
FY00 and FY01, signed into law on June 29, 1999) marks the first time that the




                                        18
                                 January Term, 2000




state has created an education budget separate from its main operating budget, by
placing the education budget into its own bill. H.B. 282 made adjustments to the
R.C. 3317.02 per-pupil formula amount, and made other adjustments in the R.C.
Chapter 3317 funding formula, enacted R.C. Chapter 3324 pertaining to gifted
students, and provided additional money for SchoolNet plus. Section 11 of the Act.
    •   Am.Sub.H.B. No. 283 (“H.B. 283”) (the Biennial Budget Bill for FY00 and
FY01, signed into law on June 30, 1999) the main operating budget bill for the
biennium, allocated state budget surplus revenue to SchoolNet Plus and for school
facilities, with some of the facilities money to go to districts with exceptional needs.
Section 124 of the Act.
    •   Am.Sub.S.B. No. 192 (“S.B. 192”) (signed into law on March 3, 2000)
provided for the allocation of money received by the state pursuant to the Tobacco
Master Settlement Agreement, committing a significant amount of tobacco
settlement funds for school construction and repair. R.C. 183.02(F) and 183.26.
See, also, Section 17 of the Act.
        {¶ 36} In addition, other initiatives are pertinent to our inquiry, including
Am.Sub.H.B. No. 1 (“H.B. 1”) (signed into law March 30, 1999; implemented the
OhioReads initiative); Am.Sub.S.B. No. 1 (signed into law May 6, 1999;
established school safety zones); and Senate Joint Resolution No. 1 (concurred in
by the House on May 4, 1999), which placed on the November 2, 1999 ballot a
proposed constitutional amendment (ultimately approved by the voters of the state)
to allow the state to issue general obligation bonds to pay for school facilities
(Sections 2n and 17, Article VIII).
                                          III
                REMEDIAL LEGISLATION AND ITS EFFECTS
        {¶ 37} We will now examine the foregoing legislation and assess its
compliance with Section 2, Article VI of the Ohio Constitution.




                                          19
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




       {¶ 38} We emphasize that due to the extent of some of the legislation,
especially H.B. 650 and H.B. 770, our discussion of it is not in any way intended
to be exhaustive.
                                         A
                          Cost of an Adequate Education
       {¶ 39} In DeRolph I, this court noted that Ohio’s system of public education
is a “statewide system” and admonished the General Assembly to “create an entirely
new school financing system.” Id., 78 Ohio St.3d at 213, 677 N.E.2d at 747.
       {¶ 40} An essential aspect of the school-funding program contained in R.C.
Chapter 3317 is “basic state aid,” which provides eligible school districts with a
guaranteed minimum amount of support. R.C. 3317.022. It is dependent on the
base cost, calculated as the unweighted average cost per student of educating
students who were enrolled in a school district that in fiscal year 1994 met
seventeen out of eighteen performance criteria and that was not excluded on the
basis of wealth or income. R.C. 3317.012(B).
       {¶ 41} In determining basic state aid, several components are considered in
calculating the amount a school district will receive: the guaranteed minimum
dollar level of financial support (the formula amount), the district’s cost-of-doing-
business factor, average daily membership (“ADM”), adjusted total taxable value,
and the charge-off amount. R.C. 3317.022.
       {¶ 42} A district’s cost-of-doing-business factor is based on the cost of
goods and services in the county where the district is located. R.C. 3317.02(N)(1).
Since the cost of goods and services is not uniform throughout the state, the cost-
of-doing-business factor is intended to put all school districts on a more level
playing field.
       {¶ 43} The ADM represents the number of students enrolled in a given
school district and is calculated pursuant to R.C. 3317.03(A). R.C. 3317.02(D)(1).




                                         20
                                 January Term, 2000




If it is more advantageous, a district may use a “three-year average formula ADM”
to calculate its ADM. R.C. 3317.02(D)(2); 3317.022(A).
        {¶ 44} A school district’s “adjusted total taxable value” is defined in R.C.
3317.02(W) and 3317.022(A)(2).
        {¶ 45} The “charge-off amount” defines a district’s responsibility for its
portion of the funding requirement. To calculate the charge-off amount, a district’s
adjusted total taxable value is multiplied by the charge-off rate, which is currently
twenty-three mills ($0.023) per dollar of valuation. R.C. 3317.022. Subtracting
the charge-off amount from the rest of the formula yields the amount of basic state
aid the district will receive. Id.
        {¶ 46} All of these variables function together so that the amount that an
eligible district will receive from the state as basic aid can be determined. The
current formula for basic state aid is: Cost-of-doing-business factor  formula
amount  (the greater of formula ADM or the three-year average of formula ADM)
– (0.023) (adjusted total taxable value). R.C. 3317.022(A)(1). The formula
demonstrates that as more per-pupil revenue is generated locally, the state’s
contribution declines.
        {¶ 47} The formula amount is the “base cost for the fiscal year specified in
section 3317.012,” adjusted with a phase-in. R.C. 3317.012(B) sets forth the
criteria used by the General Assembly to determine the base cost figure for FY96.
This number was then adjusted for inflation at an annual rate of 2.8 percent. R.C.
3317.012(A). Consequently, the base cost per pupil in FY00 is $4,177 and in FY04
will be $4,665. Id.
        {¶ 48} The base cost figure is phased in over a period of three years. R.C.
3317.02(B).     Commencing in July 2001, and every six years thereafter, the
President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives are
required to appoint three members to a committee, which will reexamine the cost
of an adequate education. R.C. 3317.012(C). This is certainly a positive step in




                                         21
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




view of the fact that the cost of an adequate education in Ohio had not been
determined since 1973-1974. DeRolph I, 78 Ohio St.3d at 261, 677 N.E.2d at 780
(Resnick, J., concurring).
       {¶ 49} In addition to the basic aid, the state provides funding for certain
programs and school district operations individually, according to formulas
established by the General Assembly. Such programs include funding for special
education, R.C. 3317.022(C), education for gifted students, R.C. 3317.024(P),
vocational education, R.C. 3317.022(E), transportation, R.C. 3317.024(E) and
3317.07, and Disadvantaged Pupil Impact Aid (“DPIA”), R.C. 3317.029. These
supplemental expenditures are often referred to collectively as categorical aid. If
the formula takes local wealth into account, then the formula is referred to as
equalized.
       {¶ 50} Special education is funded by the state in addition to the basic aid
formula. H.B. 650 and H.B. 770 require special education students to be counted in
ADM for determining basic aid. R.C. 3317.03(A). In addition to basic aid, districts
receive separate state aid for special education pupils based on a weighted ADM,
which is calculated based on the severity of the student’s disability. R.C. 3317.013,
3317.022(C), and 3317.02(F)(1) through (3).        This treatment of handicapped
students differs from the prior law, under which students whose education was
separately funded were not also included in ADM for basic aid purposes. Former
R.C. 3317.02(A), H.B. 215; former R.C. 3317.024(N), Am.Sub.S.B. No. 230, 146
Ohio Laws, Part VI, 10301, 10304.
       {¶ 51} The state continued to fund education programs for gifted children
through funding units separate from basic aid in 1999, R.C. 3317.024(P), and H.B.
650 increased the number of funding units available for FY99 from nine hundred
twenty-seven to nine hundred fifty. In H.B. 770 the General Assembly stated that
it would review and revise the formula used to fund education for gifted children.
Former R.C. 3317.024(P)(2).




                                         22
                                January Term, 2000




       {¶ 52} Vocational education is another program for which districts receive
funds from the state in addition to those provided by the basic aid formula. “The
average vocational education additional cost per pupil can be expressed as a
multiple of the base cost per pupil calculated under section 3317.012 of the Revised
Code.” R.C. 3317.014. Generally speaking, each vocational student is counted as
one ADM in the basic aid calculation, R.C. 3317.03, and an additional percentage,
which is called a “weight,” is added to take into account additional costs incurred
in providing vocational education. R.C. 3317.022(E).
       {¶ 53} The state also pays for transportation costs apart from the basic aid
formula. A district’s predicted costs are based on the density of the student
population and the number of miles traveled. R.C. 3317.022(D)(2). The state’s
share of calculated transportation costs in FY00 is 52.5 percent.              R.C.
3317.022(D)(3). The percentage will increase annually until FY03, when the
state’s share will be sixty percent. Id.
       {¶ 54} Disadvantaged Pupil Impact Aid (“DPIA”) is available to districts
that satisfy certain requirements. DPIA is designed to provide funding for programs
such as all-day kindergarten and class-size reduction to provide a select group of
students with individual attention. R.C. 3317.029.
       {¶ 55} The present school-funding scheme contains a variety of guarantees
and caps.    For instance, there are guarantees for basic aid, R.C. 3317.0212,
transportation funding, R.C. 3317.022(D)(4), and DPIA funding, R.C.
3317.029(B). Guarantees are often criticized because they tend to provide some
districts with more money than they would receive under the foundation formula
alone. “[G]uarantees work to the substantial benefit of wealthier districts and
represent a flaw in the system of school funding, because they work against the
equalization effect of the formula.” DeRolph I, 78 Ohio St.3d at 200, 677 N.E.2d
at 739. Warren G. Russell, the current Director of Legislative Services for the Ohio




                                           23
                              SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




School Boards Association, expressed the belief that the continued need for
guarantees indicates that the basic aid formula has structural problems.
       {¶ 56} Even though the current formula is almost identical to its
predecessor, we acknowledge that the state has made some alterations to the school-
funding scheme that was at issue in DeRolph I. See id., 78 Ohio St.3d at 199-200,
218, 677 N.E.2d at 738-739, 751. However, this does not mean that we retreat from
our mandate in DeRolph I, requiring Ohio’s public school financing scheme to
undergo a “complete systematic overhaul.” DeRolph I, 78 Ohio St.3d at 212, 677
N.E.2d at 747. Our assessment of compliance with this mandate is qualitative
rather than quantitative.
       {¶ 57} In order to determine the cost of a basic education, the state engaged
the services of Dr. John G. Augenblick, an expert in school finance. The state
adopted Augenblick’s methodology, with three significant changes, which
ultimately lowered his base cost figure.
       {¶ 58} The Augenblick methodology is an outputs-based approach, which
uses the eighteen performance levels enumerated in S.B. 55 to ascertain whether a
district is effective. R.C. 3302.02 and 3302.03(B)(1). A district that meets
seventeen of the eighteen criteria is deemed an effective district.            R.C.
3302.03(B)(1). Augenblick screened out some districts using criteria intended to
measure administrative efficiency. In the first of the three changes to Augenblick’s
method, the General Assembly did not use this screening procedure.
       {¶ 59} In the second change, the General Assembly enlarged the screen that
was intended to remove anomalous districts in terms of personal income, from the
fifth and ninety-fifth percentiles recommended by Augenblick to the tenth and
ninetieth percentiles.      According to Dr. Stephen P. Klein, an independent
consultant, who is also employed as a Senior Research Scientist with Rand
Corporation in Santa Monica, California, this change lowered the basic expenditure
amount by “several hundred dollars.”




                                           24
                                January Term, 2000




       {¶ 60} Using these two screens, Augenblick selected one hundred two
districts. As a result of the first two changes, the method used by the General
Assembly selected a substantially overlapping group of one hundred three districts.
Of the one hundred three districts used, the district with the lowest base cost per
pupil spent $2,755 per pupil, and the district with the highest base cost per pupil
spent $5,898.
       {¶ 61} In the third change, the method used to calculate the base figure was
changed from a weighted per-pupil average to an unweighted district average, R.C.
3317.012, with no convincing rationale given for the change. This alteration further
reduced the figure for the base cost of an adequate education.
       {¶ 62} As a result of these three changes, the base cost of an adequate
education was reduced from $4,269 for FY99 to $4,063. We can only hope that
Howard Fleeter, an Assistant Professor in the School of Public Policy and
Management at the Ohio State University, was incorrect when he opined that the
legislature made these changes in order to come up with a lower number because
some legislators were concerned with cost and the “necessity of responding to the
DeRolph decision at all because of the feeling that the state had already made
significant progress since 1991 and that they didn’t need to do anything else.”
       {¶ 63} Although we recognize that deciding what methodology to adopt is
a policy determination, we are perplexed by the General Assembly’s actions of
enlisting an expert in the area of school financing and then, with no adequate
explanation, altering his method. According to Senator Robert Cupp, no one in the
working group was an expert in statistics or Augenblick’s methodology. Russell
testified that he did not believe that the legislature had the expertise to understand
the impact of the changes made to the Augenblick methodology and to grasp the
statistical concepts involved. We share Russell’s concern. Furthermore, Klein
questioned whether the Augenblick methodology or the one adopted by the General
Assembly would provide adequate funding for Ohio’s public schools.




                                         25
                            SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




       {¶ 64} Another matter that concerns us is the process of phasing in the base
cost over a three-year period. See R.C. 3317.02(B). Because of the phase-in, the
$4,063 figure that was deemed by R.C. 3317.012 to be the base cost of an adequate
education for FY99 will not be reached until FY01 in inflation-adjusted dollars.
We find it difficult to understand how the state can justify its position that it is
funding a thorough and efficient education for Ohio’s public school children when
it is currently funding below the level that the General Assembly deemed to be the
base amount for an adequate education.
                                         B
                               Budgetary Residual
       {¶ 65} In DeRolph I, we recognized that the state was funding education as
a “residual after other mandated programs” were funded. Id., 78 Ohio St.3d at 261,
677 N.E.2d at 780. This method for calculating the cost of a basic education
involved determining how much money the state could afford for education and
working backward to arrive at the per-pupil basic subsidy.
       {¶ 66} According to Speaker Davidson, the General Assembly’s response
to the court’s concern that “the formula amount has no relation to what it actually
costs to educate a pupil” is the funding scheme set forth in H.B. 650 and H.B. 770.
Speaker Davidson claimed that the General Assembly has made a commitment to
fund primary and secondary education “based upon a rational methodology of
adequacy,” which is “locked into House Bill 650.” Senator Cupp claimed that as a
result, “there is no priority in that budget that now has a higher priority than
education.”
       {¶ 67} The General Assembly divided the budget for the 2000-2001
biennium into two sections: H.B. 282, the Education Budget Bill, and H.B. 283,
the Biennial Budget Bill. Prior to this, the budget had never been split into two
separate bills, with one bill dedicated solely to the education budget. Both bills
proceeded through the General Assembly together and were passed almost




                                         26
                                 January Term, 2000




simultaneously. Governor Taft signed H.B. 282, the Education Budget Bill, into
law on June 29, 1999, and H.B. 283 the next day.
       {¶ 68} The system’s skeptics allege that residual budgeting remains despite
the new legislation. Dr. Samuel Kern Alexander, the current president of Murray
State University, a regional state university in Kentucky, criticized the formula for
being unreliable and subject to manipulation. Alexander testified that “factors are
just being added and subtracted to reach a dollar amount that is available, a
predetermined, presumably, dollar amount that the Legislature can afford, and Dr.
Augenblick is justifying it.” In July 1997, Speaker Davidson stated that the General
Assembly was considering lowering the $4,269 per pupil figure recommended by
Augenblick because “the amount was calculated on inexact data and that lower per-
pupil funding would help make up revenues lost from scrapping the cigarette tax
and expanding property tax relief.”
       {¶ 69} We acknowledge the progress the General Assembly has made in
this area. We give defendants the benefit of the doubt, particularly in light of recent
developments, in their contention that they have not merely disguised residual
budgeting. However, we cannot totally discount evidence that the actual cost might
have been the deciding factor in selecting the method used to determine the base
cost of an adequate education.




                                          27
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




                                          C
          School Facilities—Funding for Construction and Maintenance
       {¶ 70} In DeRolph I, we held that the Classroom Facilities Act, R.C.
Chapter 3318, was unconstitutional to the extent that it was underfunded. Id., 78
Ohio St.3d 193, 677 N.E.2d 733, syllabus. Our opinion presented graphic examples
of some of the deplorable conditions existing in primary and secondary schools
throughout the state. Id. at 206-208, 677 N.E.2d at 743-744. We further remarked
that “state funding of school districts cannot be considered adequate if the districts
lack sufficient funds to provide their students a safe and healthy learning
environment.” Id. at 208, 677 N.E.2d at 744.
       {¶ 71} The Classroom Facilities Act in R.C. Chapter 3318 was enacted in
1957 and was substantially amended in May 1997. Am.Sub.S.B. No. 102. William
L. Phillis, who serves as the executive director in a consultant relationship with the
Ohio Coalition for Equity and Adequacy of School Funding, testified that
“historically not much money had been put into that program until the beginning”
of the 1990s. The 1990 Ohio Public School Facility Survey indicated that $10.2
billion was needed for facility repair and construction. DeRolph I, 78 Ohio St.3d
at 206, 677 N.E.2d at 742. The amount required as of August 1997 was estimated
to be $16.5 billion. Phillis also testified that a 1996 report issued by the United
States General Accounting Office listed Ohio as the state having the highest
percentage of school buildings with major flaws.
       {¶ 72} The General Assembly’s response to this situation was Am.Sub.S.B.
No. 102, which was signed into law on May 5, 1997. S.B. 102 established the Ohio
School Facilities Commission, R.C. 3318.30(A), which oversees the Classroom
Facilities Assistance Program (R.C. 3318.02 through 3318.041), the Emergency
School Building Repair Program (R.C. 3318.35), and the Big Eight Program
(Section 7, S.B. 102).




                                         28
                                 January Term, 2000




         {¶ 73} The commission is also charged with assessing all classroom facility
needs and conditionally approving repair and construction projects.                R.C.
3318.02(A) and 3318.04. Those districts whose adjusted valuation per pupil ranks
in the lowest one to five percent shall have priority in project approval. R.C.
3318.02(B). Once the commission conditionally approves a district’s project, the
project is submitted to the State Controlling Board for final approval. R.C. 3318.04.
If the board approves it, the district has one year to pass a half-mill levy representing
its share of the cost. R.C. 3318.05. See, also, R.C. 3318.032. If the district does
not pass a levy within that time, the conditional approval for the project shall lapse,
and the amount reserved and encumbered for the project is released. R.C. 3318.05.
If conditional approval for the district’s project lapses, that district shall be given
first priority for project funding as such funds become available. Id. The entire
process, from approval of the project to its completion, may take as long as four
years.
         {¶ 74} S.B. 102 also established the Emergency School Building Repair
Program in order to fund districts’ urgent repair needs. R.C. 3318.35. Each eligible
district that applied could receive up to $500,000 in emergency repair funds, and
districts were not required to provide matching funds. As of trial, a total of two
hundred fifty-four districts had received emergency repair funds, totaling $118
million.
         {¶ 75} The Big Eight Program is a repair program for the eight school
districts in the state that, roughly speaking, have more than twelve thousand pupils,
thirty percent of whom receive Aid to Dependent Children. Section 7, S.B. 102.
S.B. 102 set aside $100 million for this program, which requires these eight school
districts to match funds received from the state and use them for major repairs and
renovations of school facilities. Id.
         {¶ 76} In July 1997, the General Assembly adopted Sub.H.B. No. 412,
effective November 21, 1997. One of H.B. 412’s provisions requires districts to




                                           29
                              SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




establish a capital and maintenance fund and to deposit “four per cent * * * of all
revenues received by the district that would otherwise have been deposited in the
general fund, except that money received from a permanent improvement levy
authorized by section 5705.21 of the Revised Code may replace general revenue
moneys in meeting the requirements of this section.” R.C. 3315.18(A).
       {¶ 77} We recognize that the General Assembly has attempted to formulate
a viable plan to fund the construction of new school facilities and to repair Ohio’s
decaying school buildings; however, we are not without concern. For instance, a
high school in the Mad River-Green Local School District in Clark County has a
bathroom that is infested with a lethal mold. Beacon Journal, “Schools Suffering
Despite State’s Fix” (Apr. 10, 2000). This situation appears to be of an urgent
nature, yet it has not been remedied. Consequently, Mad River-Green Local
Superintendent Denny Howell must keep the bathroom boarded up in order to
prevent students from being exposed to the lethal mold that resulted from “a leak
that allowed urine and feces to drain slowly into a ceiling.” The situation in the
Mad River-Green Local School District is not an isolated incident. Many other
facilities issues plaguing our schools involve sewage problems. At Park Street
Middle School, in the South-Western City School District, a section of a locker
room in the school’s basement had to be sealed off due to a sewage backup. During
a visit to one school, Phillis walked through a “stream of water” in the building and
smelled the odor of sewage.
       {¶ 78} Randall Fischer, the Executive Director of the Ohio School Facilities
Commission, testified at the trial court hearing that except for the reserve for
emergency repair funds, the funds available for the Classroom Facilities Assistance
Program have been completely exhausted. In light of this, Fischer testified that
emergency situations were still in existence at the time of trial. For example,
thirteen schools in the Youngstown City School District did not receive funds for
asbestos abatement. Likewise, the Jackson City School District applied for but did




                                         30
                                January Term, 2000




not receive funds for asbestos removal. The Ruhlin Company served as one of the
Site Evaluation Team Leaders for the Ohio School Facilities Commission
Emergency Repair Grant Program and visited over one hundred ten schools in
forty-eight school districts in northwest Ohio. The Ruhlin Company made the
following observations: “Many of these buildings were built in the 1920s and
1930s. Although the roofs are not original, many are over 20 years old and have
reached the end of their expected life. Masonry tuckpointing has been neglected in
many buildings and exterior windows are old and leaking. The electrical systems
are not able to handle today’s power requirements for computers, TV’s and other
electronic equipment. Because of the rural nature of many of the schools, well
water and septic systems are utilized and do not meet today’s current EPA standards
and need [to be] replaced. Boilers are old and are nursed through each heating
season with yearly retubings and expensive maintenance.”
       {¶ 79} Another troublesome aspect of the Classroom Facilities Assistance
Program is that an eligible district must pass a levy within one year in order to
receive funds from the state. R.C. 3318.05. Thus, a district that fails to pass a levy
the first time must wait until the General Assembly appropriates more funds for the
program and still must pass a levy as a condition of receiving the funds.
       {¶ 80} Again, referring to the report compiled by Achieve, Inc., we note
that “despite significant recent investments the challenge remains severe. Although
estimates differ on the magnitude of the problem, by all accounts too many Ohio
children, especially in poor rural and urban districts, attend classes in dreadfully
sub-standard facilities. [Emphasis sic.] * * * During this decade [the 1990s] the
state has invested over $1 billion in capital improvement funds for schools, more
than tripling the investments made over the previous four decades. However,
without a reliable inventory of the state’s facilities and a solid cost estimate for
bringing all Ohio school[s] up to standard, it is impossible to know just how much
progress has been made. While the state has at least made a down payment on a




                                         31
                               SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




long deferred problem, this is a major piece of unfinished business for Ohio’s
policymakers.” (Emphasis added.)
          {¶ 81} In addition, according to Fischer, there is no degree of certainty as
to what the future funding from the state will be. Am.Sub.H.B. No. 770, effective
June 17, 1998, requires the Governor to recommend and request that no less than
$300 million be appropriated annually to school facilities when future budgets are
submitted to the General Assembly. R.C. 107.031. R.C. 107.031 merely requires
that the Governor shall “ensure that among the various budget recommendations
made * * * to the general assembly each biennium there are recommendations for
appropriations to the Ohio school facilities commission, aggregating not less than
three hundred million dollars per fiscal year.” R.C. 107.031. Phillis testified that
at a rate of $300 million per year, it would take fifty-five years to correct the $16.5
billion deficit, and this estimate does not take into account “rolling decay.”
          {¶ 82} While visiting some of Ohio’s schools, Phillis made several
observations. At trial, Phillis described a school building in the Morgan Local
School District that was built before 1900 and has sunk approximately six inches.
As a result of this settling, the doors no longer fit in their frames. Phillis visited a
school that was heated with a coal-fired furnace and saw coal dust in the
classrooms. During a visit to Bloom Carroll Middle School, which was built in the
early 1900s, Phillis noticed that the brick on the building’s façade was cracked.
Additionally, Phillis noted that many of the buildings he visited lacked handicapped
access.
          {¶ 83} From the foregoing, it is readily apparent that this is an important
area that will continue to require the attention of the Governor and future General
Assemblies. We acknowledge the initiatives in Am.Sub.H.B. No. 850 (effective
March 19, 1999), which appropriated $505 million for school facilities (see
Sections 6 and 26 of the Act), and Am.Sub.H.B. No. 283, which appropriated an
additional $325.7 million, by devoting money from the state’s budget surplus to




                                           32
                                January Term, 2000




school facilities. See Section 124 of the Act. When combined with moneys
appropriated from Am.Sub.S.B. No. 102, Am.Sub.H.B. No. 215, Am.Sub.H.B. No.
650, and commitments from other sources, recent appropriations for facilities are
in excess of $1.6 billion, yet the immediate needs are much greater. As recognized
in the reply brief of amicus curiae Governor Taft, on September 9, 1999, the
Governor proposed a school facilities allocation plan called “Rebuilding Ohio’s
Schools: A 12-Year Commitment.” The plan proposes to allocate an additional
$23.1 billion in state and local funds to school facilities from FY01 to FY12. The
state share of that amount would be $10.2 billion, broken down into $5.9 billion
from the capital budget, $1.8 billion from cash appropriations and interest earnings,
and $2.5 billion from the state tobacco litigation settlement. The plan calls for the
state share to be accompanied by $12.9 billion in local matching funds. In addition,
the plan calls for the establishment of a trust fund with some of the tobacco
settlement money to take care of future school needs.
       {¶ 84} At the time of this writing, a significant component of the
Governor’s plan appears to be in place. On March 3, 2000, the Governor signed
into law Am.Sub.S.B. No. 192, which provides for the distribution of money
received by the state pursuant to the Tobacco Master Settlement Agreement. As
pertinent to our consideration here, this legislation allocates nearly $2.5 billion in
tobacco settlement funds through FY12 to go for school construction and repair,
through the Education Facilities Trust Fund. See R.C. 183.02(F) and 183.26. The
legislation also allocates funds for classroom technology, see R.C. 183.02(H) and
183.28, and establishes and allocates money to an Education Facilities Endowment
Fund, with investment earnings transferred each quarter to the Facilities Trust Fund,
R.C. 183.02(G) and 183.27. Provisions are also made addressing appropriations
for school construction and repair from FY12 to FY25. Section 17 of the Act. The
firmness of all the commitments contained within this legislation is of course
limited by the prohibition of Section 22, Article II of the Ohio Constitution, which




                                         33
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




prohibits the General Assembly from appropriating for more than a two-year
period. Thus, even though the long-term plan is in place, the General Assembly
must appropriate the money every two years.
       {¶ 85} The task at hand is not one to be taken lightly. One-half of Ohio’s
school buildings are fifty years old or older. DeRolph I, 78 Ohio St.3d at 206, 677
N.E.2d at 742. Constructing and maintaining school buildings is an ongoing
process, and this court recognizes that it would be unreasonable to require the
General Assembly to remedy overnight what has taken decades of neglect to
develop, yet there remains an extensive amount of work to be done in order to
educate Ohio’s students in “safe and healthy learning” environments. Id. at 208,
677 N.E.2d at 744. Continuing funding in this area is of the utmost importance.
                                         D
                                    Borrowing
       {¶ 86} In DeRolph I, this court found the following provisions, relating to
forced borrowing, unconstitutional: R.C. 133.301, which granted borrowing
authority to school districts, and R.C. 3313.483, 3313.487, 3313.488, 3313.489,
and 3313.4810, which provided for emergency school assistance loans. Id., 78
Ohio St.3d 193, 677 N.E.2d 733, syllabus. These statutes were deemed to be an
inherent weakness in the state’s school-financing system because they required
districts that were unable to satisfy their budgetary requirements to borrow funds at
commercial lending rates. Id. at 201, 677 N.E.2d at 739. When these borrowing
statutes were in effect, over $700 million was borrowed by local school districts so
that they could keep their schools operating.
       {¶ 87} The first type of borrowing held unconstitutional in DeRolph I was
the “spending reserve” loan in R.C. 133.301, which enabled school districts to
borrow against a subsequent year’s revenue, as long as the district received
approval from the Superintendent of Public Instruction. Id. at 201, 677 N.E.2d at
739. If the spending reserve loan was not enough to enable the district to meet




                                         34
                               January Term, 2000




current operating needs, then the district was required to seek necessary funding
from a commercial lender. Id. at 201, 677 N.E.2d at 739; R.C. 3313.483 and
3313.483(D). These borrowing programs, which were characterized by this court
as “nothing less than a clever disguise for the state’s failure to raise revenue
sufficient to discharge its constitutional obligations,” drove school districts into
deeper financial distress. Id. at 202, 677 N.E.2d at 740.
       {¶ 88} What is the status of forced borrowing today? Although the General
Assembly has taken some steps to eliminate forced borrowing from the school-
financing scheme, it remains unclear whether these changes will rectify the
problem.
       {¶ 89} The Spending Reserve Loan Program is being phased out pursuant
to R.C. 5705.29(F)(1) and (2).       Additionally, the School District Solvency
Assistance Fund, which is operated by the Ohio Department of Education, was
established in H.B. 412 and went into effect on November 21, 1997. R.C. 3316.20.
The Solvency Assistance Fund provides interest-free “advancements to school
districts to enable them to remain solvent and to pay unforeseeable expenses of a
temporary or emergency nature that they are unable to pay from existing resources.”
Id.
       {¶ 90} One concern voiced by Russell is that many districts will still be
forced to borrow funds, because the circumstances that necessitated the initial
borrowing still exist, despite the recent legislation. Likewise, Charles Brown, the
Assistant Director of the Division of School Finance of the Ohio Department of
Education, is concerned that H.B. 412’s set-aside requirements will require
additional borrowing in order to comply with the mandates.
       {¶ 91} The plaintiffs allege that the School Solvency Assistance Fund is no
different from the former Emergency School Assistance Loan Program, other than
the fact that the School Solvency Assistance Program Fund provides for interest-
free loans. According to Brown, the procedures for obtaining and repaying loans




                                         35
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




are virtually identical under both programs. For instance, the repayment period for
both types of loans is typically two years. Furthermore, districts must exhaust their
spending reserve before they can access advances from the solvency fund. R.C.
3316.20. This requirement mirrors one in the former Emergency School Assistance
Loan Program that required a district to borrow from its spending reserve fund
before obtaining approval for an emergency loan. See R.C. 3313.483(B).
       {¶ 92} In addition to our concerns about the impact that the School
Solvency Assistance Fund will have on future borrowing, we are also troubled by
the influence H.B. 650 and H.B. 770 will have. At his deposition, David Brunson,
the Assistant Director of the Ohio Legislative Budget Office (“LBO”), testified that
the LBO did not research or analyze the effect that H.B. 650 and H.B. 770 would
have on borrowing.      Moreover, Augenblick did not take borrowing or the
repayment of existing loans into account in arriving at a base cost figure.
Augenblick had no knowledge of the amount of money that school districts would
be required to pay in FY99 for borrowing that occurred during and prior to 1999.
       {¶ 93} The final loans under the former Emergency School Assistance Loan
Program were approved by the State Controlling Board on February 9, 1998.
Repayment of these loans will continue through at least 2007 and will be made
from funds that districts would otherwise receive as school foundation payments.
       {¶ 94} The lingering effects of the forced-borrowing scheme will haunt
school districts for many years to come. As we examine the new legislation
promulgated by the General Assembly in response to our holding in DeRolph I, we
are dubious that the new measures will resolve the problem. We recognize that
some type of borrowing provision may be necessary to provide funds in the case of
extreme emergencies or unexpected calamities; however, any system that entails
borrowing from future funds to meet ordinary expenses is not a thorough and
efficient system. Except in extreme cases, reliance on loans must be eradicated,




                                         36
                                January Term, 2000




and loans certainly must not be employed as a method to meet school districts’ daily
operational expenses.
                                         E
                        Overreliance on Local Property Taxes
       {¶ 95} In DeRolph I, this court held that one of the principal factors
rendering the school-funding system unworkable was the state’s heavy reliance on
local property taxes to fund primary and secondary education. Id., 78 Ohio St.3d
at 212, 677 N.E.2d at 747. Our holding in DeRolph I did not say that local property
taxes could not be a component of the state’s school-funding formula, but rather
that local property taxes could no longer be the primary means of providing for a
thorough and efficient system of schools. See id. at 262, 677 N.E.2d at 780
(Resnick, J., concurring).      For instance, in FY97, the state contributed
approximately 43.8 percent to districts for school funding, excluding federal funds,
while the local share was approximately 56.2 percent.
       {¶ 96} Property taxes are still the single most important source of funding
for schools, and seventy percent or more of all property taxes levied are allocated
to public schools. Overreliance on local property taxes was one of the factors that
rendered the school-funding scheme deficient, yet this aspect of the former system
persists in the state’s current funding plan, wholly unchanged. The system’s
dependence on local property taxes has resulted in vast disparities among Ohio’s
six hundred eleven public school districts due to the differences in revenue
generated by each. For instance, according to a memorandum prepared by Mike
Sobul at the Ohio Department of Taxation for the 1995 fiscal year, a one-mill
property tax on Class I real property produced $272.90 per student in the district
with the highest property tax base and $13.34 per student in the district with the
lowest. A system that places too much reliance on local property taxes puts
property-poor districts at a disadvantage because “ ‘they must tax at significantly
higher rates in order to meet minimum requirements for accreditation; yet their




                                         37
                                 SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




educational programs are typically inferior.’ “ DeRolph I, 78 Ohio St.3d at 204,
677 N.E.2d at 741, quoting Edgewood Indep. School Dist. v. Kirby (Tex.1989), 777
S.W.2d 391, 393.
        {¶ 97} The state would like this court to believe that overreliance on local
property taxes will dissipate once the new measures are fully phased in, so that the
only reason a district would have to look to local property taxes would be that the
district wants to fund beyond adequacy. Unfortunately, the reality of the situation
at this time appears to be otherwise.
        {¶ 98} A perfect example of overreliance on local property taxes is the
situation currently affecting the Toledo Public Schools. Toledo schools are faced
with an $18 million deficit, and in March voters rejected a 6.9-mill operating levy
that would have provided Toledo schools with $17.1 million annually. Toledo
Blade (Mar. 5 and Apr. 16, 2000). Now school officials may be forced to shut
down two secondary schools and eliminate two hundred thirty-five teaching
positions. This should not happen in a state-funded system of common schools.
        {¶ 99} Moreover, recent legislation has the potential to actually increase
reliance on local property taxes beyond the level deemed unsatisfactory in DeRolph
I. The phase-out of the inventory tax in Am.Sub.H.B. No. 283 will result in
significant revenue losses. See R.C. 5711.22(E). As of May 1999, inventory was
assessed at a rate of twenty-five percent of its true value and then subjected to local
property taxation. In 1997, inventory tax revenues provided 7.77 percent of the
total local property tax revenue received by districts. The Legislative Budget Office
estimates that as a result of the phase-out local school districts will lose $60.9
million in revenue in 2002. The state has provided minimal replacement revenue.
According to a report prepared by Dr. Howard Fleeter in May 1999 for the
Education Tax Policy Institute (“ETPI”),2 this reduction “reduces the property tax

2. The Education Tax Policy Institute (“ETPI”) was formed in 1977 to act as an “independent, data-
driven organization” for the purpose of analyzing tax policy issues. ETPI’s membership includes




                                               38
                                     January Term, 2000




revenues received by all of Ohio’s local government entities, including school
districts.” Furthermore, Fleeter used data collected for the years 1984 through 1993
to reach the conclusion that “school district millage increases play an important role
in ameliorating the decreases in revenue brought about by reductions” in the
inventory rate. In fact, Fleeter’s report establishes that “local tax increases served
to reduce actual revenue losses in Ohio school districts by more than 50%.” We
are in accord with Fleeter’s opinion that “the fact that local taxpayers are bearing
at least some of the brunt of this state policy change seems inescapable.”
         {¶ 100} Additionally, the unfunded mandates in Sub.H.B. No. 412 and
Am.Sub.S.B. No. 55 will likely require increased reliance on property taxes. These
bills are projected to cost districts $343,758,940. According to Brown, districts
may be forced to levy additional taxes in order to satisfy the set-aside requirements
of H.B. 412.
         {¶ 101} Ohio’s system of public education is a “statewide system.”
DeRolph I, 78 Ohio St.3d at 213, 677 N.E.2d at 747. The state is responsible for
funding an adequate education for all primary and secondary students who attend
public schools. In our earlier opinion, this court informed the General Assembly
that a school-funding scheme that relies too heavily on local property taxes for
revenue would not satisfy the Thorough and Efficient Clause of the Ohio
Constitution. See id. at 212, 677 N.E.2d at 747. Consequently, a revised funding
scheme that increases reliance on local property taxes would not be “thorough and
efficient.” Thus, the General Assembly must avoid compounding the school-
funding system’s infirmities with new legislation that increases reliance on local
property taxes.
         {¶ 102} The state’s failure to specifically address the school-funding
system’s overreliance on local property taxes is of paramount concern as we

approximately one hundred school districts and several state-level groups representing public sector
organizations and employees.




                                                39
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




evaluate the state’s attempts to craft a thorough and efficient system of funding.
The state’s argument that it can minimize this problem by addressing the other
aspects identified in DeRolph I as contributing to the unworkability of the system
in place at that time, see 78 Ohio St.3d at 212, 677 N.E.2d at 747, is unconvincing.
We see no indication that anything significant has been done to remove this primary
impediment, which was the major factor in the previous funding system found
unconstitutional in DeRolph I. No further effort at specifically addressing this
overreliance on property taxes has been made since the voters of the state rejected
the one-cent sales tax increase on the May 5, 1998 ballot. The problem of
overreliance on local property taxes must be independently addressed, and all
potential solutions to this problem must be explored. The inequities inherent in a
system that relies too heavily on local property taxes will remain until this problem
is resolved by the General Assembly.
                                         F
                                 Phantom Revenue
        {¶ 103} The phenomenon known as “phantom revenue” is one of the
weaknesses this court identified in DeRolph I as plaguing Ohio’s system of school
finance. Id., 78 Ohio St.3d at 201, 677 N.E.2d at 739. Although phantom revenue
is not easily defined, Frederick Church of the Legislative Budget Office says that it
can be thought of as occurring “when the growing property wealth of a school
district gives the illusion of a commensurably increasing revenue stream, which, in
fact, is not realized.”
        {¶ 104} The consulting firm of Levin & Driscoll has identified three types
of phantom revenue.
        {¶ 105} “Type I” phantom revenue, which is sometimes referred to as
“phantom millage,” occurs when a school district fails to levy at least twenty-three
effective mills. “[P]hantom revenue in this type equals the difference between the
revenue obtained from the district’s effective tax rate and the revenue that the




                                         40
                                  January Term, 2000




district would receive from a 23 mill effective rate.” Type I phantom revenue can
occur as a result of either the application of 1976 Am.Sub.H.B. No. 920, 136 Ohio
Laws, Part II, 3182, or a district’s failure to obtain voter approval for at least twenty-
three mills. R.C. 319.301.
        {¶ 106} Levin & Driscoll characterizes “Type II” phantom revenue as
property tax revenue credited to a school district when its tax base increases, but
which is never actually received by the district due to H.B. 920’s tax-reduction
factors, found in R.C. 319.301. See DeRolph I at 200-201, 677 N.E.2d at 739. R.C.
319.301 “requires the application of tax reduction factors when property values
increase due to reappraisal or update.” Id. at 201, 677 N.E.2d at 739. The purpose
is to “limit the effect of inflation in property values on growth of real property tax
revenues.” Id. at 221, 677 N.E.2d at 753. R.C. 319.301 gives real property owners
a tax credit, so that the amount paid on voted millage remains the same as it was
prior to the reappraisal or update. Consequently, a school district receives the same
amount of revenue “from voted tax levies after reappraisal as it did before
reappraisal, notwithstanding that real property valuation in the district has increased
through inflation since the time of the initial tax levy.” Id. at 221, 677 N.E.2d at
753 (Douglas, J., concurring).
        {¶ 107} “Type III” phantom revenue “results from the use of an income-
adjusted tax base rather than actual taxable value for purposes of computing a
school district’s chargeoff.” Type III phantom revenue is the difference between
the revenue received from twenty-three mills and the yield required by the
chargeoff.
        {¶ 108} According to a report prepared by Levin & Driscoll, all three types
of phantom revenue are problematic for school districts, because the basic aid
formula “counts local revenue without empowering the district to raise that
revenue.”




                                           41
                              SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




        {¶ 109} The state maintains that the phantom revenue problem has been
resolved because H.B. 650 provides for a charge-off supplement and power
equalization. R.C. 3317.0216(B) and (C); 3317.0215.
        {¶ 110} The charge-off supplement is intended to ensure that districts
obtain the full amount of state and local funds that the basic aid formula allocates
to them. The charge-off supplement is also referred to as “gap aid.” If a district’s
charge-off amount is greater than the district’s total receipts available for current
expenses, then the state will pay the district an amount representing the difference.
R.C. 3317.0216(B). When new local revenue is generated, a district’s charge-off
supplement is reduced dollar for dollar.
        {¶ 111} Power equalization is intended to act as an incentive for districts
with below-average property wealth to levy more than twenty-three mills. Power
equalization applies only to the Class I effective rate and mills between twenty-
three and twenty-five. R.C. 5713.041; 3317.0215. “If the total effective operating
tax rate of a district is greater than two and three-tenths per cent, the district shall
receive a payment computed by multiplying the lesser of two-tenths of one per cent
or the equalized tax rate by the amount by which the state taxable value per pupil
exceeds the district’s total taxable value per pupil times the district’s formula
ADM.” R.C. 3317.0215(B). Maxwell provided the trial court with the following
illustrative example of how power equalization works: if the valuation per pupil in
the state were $95,000, then one mill would yield $95, and if an eligible district has
a valuation per pupil of $55,000, then one mill would yield $55 per pupil. Since
only $55 is raised locally, under the concept of power equalization, the state makes
up the difference, $40, to arrive at the $95.
        {¶ 112} In spite of provisions in H.B. 650, not every type of phantom
revenue has disappeared. Although we are encouraged by testimony that the
charge-off supplement is reducing Type I phantom revenue, we are mindful that
this type of phantom revenue may continue in some districts. Furthermore, H.B.




                                           42
                                January Term, 2000




650 does not alleviate Type II phantom revenue, which results from the application
of H.B. 920’s tax-reduction factors.
       {¶ 113} Another concern is that H.B. 650 may even compound the phantom
revenue predicament by creating additional types of phantom revenue. Both
Russell and Maxwell testified that a new type of phantom revenue results from
power equalization. Maxwell believes that since “property valuation increases due
to reappraisal cause the millage rate to be reduced regularly,” some districts may
lose equalization payments and “would have to vote millage every time reappraisal
occurs.” Additionally, Maxwell testified that including special education pupils in
a district’s ADM creates a new type of phantom revenue. Ultimately, certain school
districts may be required to go back to the voters and ask for additional tax increases
to make up for lost revenue.
       {¶ 114} Requiring school districts to seek additional tax increases to make
up for lost revenue is something that should be avoided, especially in view of our
holding in DeRolph I, which required overreliance on local property taxes to be
eliminated. The Achieve, Inc. report quoted one school superintendent who stated,
“I spend every third year running a political campaign, not running my school
district.” This is not how a thorough and efficient system should function and
further serves to emphasize why heavy reliance on local property taxes must end.




                                          43
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




                                            G
                                      Accountability
       {¶ 115} In response to our decision in DeRolph I, the General Assembly
enacted several new pieces of legislation. Two of the bills focus primarily on
school district accountability: H.B. 412 is directed at fiscal accountability, and S.B.
55 establishes academic accountability.
                       Fiscal Accountability: House Bill 412
       {¶ 116} H.B. 412 centers on implementing fiscal accountability for school
districts. This bill contains three set-aside requirements: a capital and maintenance
fund (R.C. 3315.18), a textbook and instructional materials fund (R.C. 3315.17),
and a “reserve balance fund” (R.C. 5705.29[H]).
       {¶ 117} R.C. 3315.18(A) requires each district’s board of education to
create a capital and maintenance fund and to deposit into that fund “four per cent
of all revenues received by the district that would otherwise have been deposited in
the general fund, except that money received from a permanent improvement levy
authorized by section 5705.21 of the Revised Code may replace general revenue
moneys” in meeting these requirements. Money placed in this fund can be used
only for “acquisition, replacement, enhancement, maintenance, or repair of
permanent improvements.”        Id.     The four-percent requirement is phased in
according to the schedule set forth in Ohio Adm.Code 117-2-23(B).
       {¶ 118} R.C. 3315.17(A) requires each board of education to “establish a
textbook and instructional materials fund” and to “deposit into that fund four per
cent, or another percentage if established in rules adopted under division (C) of this
section, of all revenues received by the district for operating expenses.” The four-
percent requirement is phased in according to the schedule set forth in Ohio
Adm.Code 117-2-23(A). Money deposited in this fund “shall be used solely for
textbooks, instructional software, and instructional materials, supplies, and
equipment.” R.C. 3315.17(A). If a district does not use all of these funds in a given




                                            44
                                January Term, 2000




fiscal year, the funds carry forward to the next fiscal year. Id. Additionally,
pursuant to subsection (D), a school district may opt out of this requirement. R.C.
3315.17(D). We are not addressing the content of the opt-out provision at this time.
       {¶ 119} R.C. 5705.29(H)(1) requires each board of education to “establish
a reserve balance account to accumulate currently available resources to stabilize
the school district’s budget against cyclical changes in revenues and expenditures.”
Subject to certain exceptions, see Ohio Adm.Code 117-2-24, “[t]he balance in the
reserve balance account shall not at any time be less than five per cent of general
fund revenues for the most recently concluded fiscal year.” R.C. 5705.29(H)(1).
Beginning in fiscal year 2000, a district is required, subject to limited exceptions,
to set aside one percent of its revenue “until the balance in the reserve balance
account equals five per cent of the district’s revenues received for current expenses
for the preceding fiscal year.” R.C. 5705.29(H)(2)(a).
                     Academic Accountability: Senate Bill 55
       {¶ 120} S.B. 55 is composed of various provisions mandating academic
accountability. The bill raises the number of credits required for high school
graduation (R.C. 3313.603[B]), creates a fourth-grade reading guarantee (R.C.
3313.608[A]), and sets standards for school district performance (R.C. 3302.02 and
3302.03).
       {¶ 121} “Beginning September 15, 2001, the requirements for graduation
from every high school shall include twenty-one units earned in grades nine through
twelve.” R.C. 3313.603(B). S.B. 55 increases the number of credits required for
English language arts, mathematics, science, and social studies.                R.C.
3313.603(B)(1), (3), (5), and (6).
       {¶ 122} The fourth-grade reading guarantee states that “[b]eginning with
students who enter fourth grade in the school year that starts July 1, 2001, no
* * * school * * * shall promote to fifth grade any student who fails to attain” the
designated score on the test prescribed in R.C. 3301.0710(A)(1) that measures




                                         45
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




reading ability, unless either the pupil was excused from taking the test or the pupil
is deemed to be “academically prepared” to be promoted to the fifth grade. R.C.
3313.608(A)(1) and (A)(2).
       {¶ 123} Pursuant to S.B. 55, school districts will be rated on performance
and receive annual report cards. R.C. 3302.03(A) and (D)(1). The provision for
evaluating district performance states that beginning July 1, 1999 (FY00), “every
three years the department of education shall calculate and report for each school
district its percentages on each of the performance indicators listed in section
3302.02 of the Revised Code and shall specify for each such district the extent to
which the acceptable performance indicator has been achieved and whether the
district is an effective school district, needs continuous improvement, is under an
academic watch, or is in a state of academic emergency.” R.C. 3302.03(A). In
addition to performance reports, the Department of Education is required to “issue
annual report cards for each school district and for the state as a whole based on
education and fiscal performance data.” R.C. 3302.03(D)(1).
                            Discussion of Accountability
       {¶ 124} Jeffrey Sutton, the state’s attorney, described the current school-
funding system as placing “[k]ids first, money second,” and having “accountability
throughout.” We agree that accountability is an important component of a system
that provides funds. What is problematic, however, is a system that increases
academic requirements and accountability, yet fails to provide adequate funding.
       {¶ 125} A Fiscal Note and Local Impact Statement prepared by the Ohio
Legislative Budget Office for S.B. 55 indicated that the “state would increase its
school funding in the range of a billion dollars per year beginning in FY 1999” and
that this “funding increase would help districts to make any necessary changes to
meet performance standards proposed by the bill.” The increased funding was not
part of S.B. 55 and was dependent on voter approval of a one-cent sales tax increase.
Both S.B. 55 and H.B. 412 were proceeding through the General Assembly at the




                                         46
                                January Term, 2000




same time as the proposed sales tax increase. On February 17, 1998, the Ohio
Senate approved H.B. 697, which placed the one-cent sales tax increase on the May
5, 1998 ballot for voter approval. The one-cent sales tax increase, which appeared
on the May 5 ballot as Issue 2, was not approved by voters. Consequently, school
districts are required to adhere to the bills’ additional requirements and standards
of accountability, but the anticipated funding must now come from a different
source.
          {¶ 126} Since these mandates are essentially unfunded, a paramount
concern is that H.B. 412 and S.B. 55 will impose additional costs on school districts.
David Brunson testified that the Legislative Budget Office did not do a detailed
analysis to estimate what the cost of S.B. 55’s increased graduation requirements
would be throughout the state; however, the Fiscal Note indicates that those
“districts that currently require less than 21 units of credit for graduation would
incur additional costs.” The Legislative Budget Office conducted a random survey
of twenty school districts in an attempt to determine the potential impact of S.B.
55, and fourteen of the twenty districts indicated that they would incur additional
expenses as a result of the bill. Additional costs may be incurred in establishing
appropriate scientific laboratories and in hiring more teachers, especially those
qualified to teach mathematics and science courses. The Department of Education
estimates that the average cost for a biology laboratory is $140,000. Districts may
also face increased costs as a consequence of R.C. 3313.608(B) through (E), which
require remediation and intervention services for those students who do not pass
the fourth-grade reading test.     What is particularly bothersome about these
unfunded mandates is that if a district does not have sufficient funds in its existing
budget, then it may have to seek additional funds from other sources, such as
passing additional levies or borrowing from lenders.
          {¶ 127} From the foregoing discussion regarding academic accountability,
we do not want our concerns to be misconstrued as disfavor for the general concept




                                         47
                              SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




of accountability. Instead, we clearly state that in order to have a thorough and
efficient system of schools, there must be statewide standards that are fully
developed, clearly stated, and understood by educators, students, and parents. The
report compiled by Achieve, Inc. succinctly sets forth the perspective that “states
need to have at the heart of their education reform strategy clear and rigorous
academic standards, challenging assessments designed to measure progress
against those standards, and an accountability system that rewards success and
takes action against persistent failure. We do not mean to suggest that standards,
assessment, and accountability can by themselves produce significant changes in
student performance; but they can and should be important drivers of change in
curriculum, instructional practice, and school organization. They need, most
importantly, to be accompanied by a thoughtful, comprehensive, sustained strategy
for strengthening the capacity of teachers, principals, and other education
professionals to change their practice, and a commitment to provide extra resources
and support to students and schools who start out furthest from the goal line. But
without a clear roadmap for teachers, parents, and students (i.e., standards), an
agreed-upon yardstick for measuring progress (i.e., assessments) and consequences
for results (i.e., accountability), states in our view are unlikely to help their schools
significantly improve student performance. Ohio has important building blocks in
place in its standards-assessment-accountability system, but we believe each of
these elements needs to be substantially strengthened if this system is to become a
powerful lever for improving teaching and learning in the classroom.” (Emphasis
sic.)
        {¶ 128} The Achieve, Inc. report recognized that the lack of standards was
a significant deficiency in Ohio’s system.         The report noted that “[s]trictly
speaking, Ohio does not really have statewide academic standards, at least as that
term is used in most other states.        The absence of standards is particularly
troublesome because virtually all participants in Ohio education reform activities




                                           48
                                January Term, 2000




agree that clear standards should be the basis for pre-service training for teachers,
the curriculum, student assessments, classroom materials, and ongoing professional
development. Unless there is clear understanding of what students are expected to
learn, how can teachers’ colleges know what teachers are supposed to teach? How
can assessment developers know what to test? How can publishers of textbooks
and instructional materials know what to include at each grade level? How can
students prepare for the tests if there is no clear-cut agreement about what they are
supposed to learn?” (Emphasis sic.)
       {¶ 129} Some of the same concerns encountered with regard to S.B. 55 arise
with respect to the set-aside requirements in H.B. 412. According to Maxwell and
Goff, those districts that are most likely to be affected are the ones borrowing or
paying back money that was previously borrowed. A Fiscal Note and Local Impact
Statement prepared by the LBO for H.B. 412 predicts that the four-percent set-aside
requirement for capital and maintenance and the four-percent set-aside for
textbooks and instructional materials could each total approximately $400 million
statewide.
       {¶ 130} From the foregoing, it is readily apparent that a great deal of work
has yet to be done before Ohio can be said to have a constitutional thorough and
efficient system of public schools. We recognize that much more is involved in
this process than merely providing funds. Consequently, educators, lawmakers,
businesses, parents, and students must all work together to strengthen Ohio’s
system of public schools.
       {¶ 131} Governor Taft recognized this need in his January 19, 2000 State
of the State Address, when he said, “Education is a matter of survival in today’s
world and the [proficiency] tests are helping to lift student achievement. We must
never retreat from high standards, rigorous assessment and accountability for
results! In fact, I believe we can do even more to build on our success and help
students reach those high standards, not only on the fourth grade test but also on




                                         49
                            SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




the new tenth grade exams. That’s why we must closely align what we expect,
what we teach, how we assess, and how we reward performance and correct
failure.”
        {¶ 132} Strict statewide standards must be developed and implemented, so
teachers know what they are required to teach, and students know what they are
required to learn. Governor Taft has recognized this need and has taken steps in
the right direction, as evidenced by his January 19, 2000 State of the State Address
in which he declared, “So today, I propose to establish the Governor’s Commission
for Student Success.     Its members will represent employers, colleges and
universities, parents and children, educators, school board members and legislators.
I will ask this commission to address four questions:
        “How do we make it crystal clear to students, parents, and educators what
students should know and be able to do in each grade and before graduation?
        “How should we measure student performance and progress in each grade?
        “How should we hold students and adults responsible for academic
achievement?
        “And how do we make sure that all parts of the system work together in
complete alignment?”




                                        50
                                January Term, 2000




                                         IV
                                  CONCLUSION
       {¶ 133} At the present time, it is apparent to us that, despite the past and
present efforts of Governor Taft and our General Assembly, the mandate of the
Constitution has not yet been fulfilled. We acknowledge the effort that has been
made, and that a good faith attempt to comply with the constitutional requirements
has been mounted, but even more is required. The process must continue.
       {¶ 134} The most glaring weakness in the state’s attempts to put in place a
thorough and efficient system of education is the failure to specifically address the
overreliance on local property taxes. If this problem is not rectified, it will be
virtually impossible for the revised school-funding system to be characterized as
thorough and efficient.
       {¶ 135} Despite our vast concerns over the failure to address the funding
system’s overemphasis on local property tax, we do perceive evidence of some
positive developments.     Finally the Governor and General Assembly have
recognized that education can no longer be funded as a residual in the state budget.
Funding must be provided consistently with the Section 2, Article VI constitutional
mandate of a “thorough and efficient system of common schools.” With the recent
passage of H.B. 282, there is now a separate state budget for education. In addition,
Governor Taft has provided the impetus for recent initiatives to provide
significantly more money for school building construction and maintenance.
       {¶ 136} Furthermore, other significant initiatives are being developed. The
SchoolNet and SchoolNet Plus programs, recognizing the value of developing
computer-literate students, continue to evolve and are clearly positive steps. See
H.B. 282, R.C. 3301.80 and 3301.801. Yet there is so much yet to be done in this
area. We are still a long way from the goal of providing sufficient computers to
allow a high quality education in this computer age. Moreover, there is no specific




                                         51
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




program in place to provide computers for students above the fifth-grade level.
This is a crucial need so that students nearing graduation will be computer-literate.
       {¶ 137} The OhioReads initiative put into motion by Am.Sub.H.B. No. 1,
effective March 30, 1999, is another laudable step being championed by the
Governor. See R.C. 3301.85 et seq. By providing several types of grants (both to
schools and communities, see R.C. 3301.86 and 3301.87) to promote the fourth-
grade reading guarantee, and also by encouraging volunteer tutors to become
involved in their local school districts (see R.C. 3301.91[A]), OhioReads appears
to be a significant agent for improvement. Yet only time will tell if this initiative
will be successful in furthering the goals of the fourth-grade reading guarantee.
       {¶ 138} In light of the progress that the Governor and General Assembly
have made, in some areas, thus far, and unwilling to reject in toto the sum of those
efforts, we determine that the best course of action at this time is to provide the
defendants more time to comply with Section 2, Article VI of the Ohio Constitution.
We are confident that, given the additional opportunity presented by this extension
of time, the General Assembly and the Governor will continue to deliberate over
the many obstacles they face, and will continue to seek solutions to these complex
problems.
       {¶ 139} The following major areas warrant further attention, study, and
development by the General Assembly, but are not by any means the only areas
requiring scrutiny:
       (1) Continued reliance on local property taxes as a primary means to fund
Ohio’s schools has not been specifically addressed and may in fact be compounded
by H.B. 283’s phase-out of the inventory tax, which may result in even greater
reliance on local contributions in the future. The failure to address this problem
will make it exceedingly difficult for any system of school funding to comply with
the Thorough and Efficient Clause, since the inherent inequities will remain.




                                         52
                                January Term, 2000




       (2) The basic aid formula has structural deficiencies and may not in fact
reflect the amount required per pupil to provide an adequate education. The phase-
in aspect of the basic aid amount should be reconsidered.
       (3) Continuing attention must be given to the mechanism implemented to
fund the construction of new school facilities and to repair older, decaying school
buildings, until the task is complete. Additionally, requiring local districts to pass
levies as a prerequisite for obtaining state funding should be reviewed.
       (4) The School Solvency Assistance Fund established by H.B. 412 must be
reevaluated, so that funds are available and used only in case of extreme
emergencies and not for unfunded mandates or day-to-day expenses.
       (5) The unfunded mandates in H.B. 412 and S.B. 55, which will necessitate
either increased reliance on local property taxes or additional borrowing from the
School Solvency Assistance Fund, must be addressed and immediately funded.
       (6) The phenomenon known as phantom revenue has not been eliminated
and may increase as a consequence of H.B. 650.
       (7) Strict, statewide academic guidelines must be developed and rigorously
followed throughout all of Ohio’s public school districts.
       {¶ 140} The foregoing are the major areas that necessitate further attention
and review by all parties involved in Ohio’s educational system. We hope that
partisan views will be put aside and that everyone will work cooperatively for
Ohio’s children, as they are our future. The General Assembly, in particular, must
look beyond the political considerations involved, and must provide Ohio’s school
children with a thorough and efficient system of common schools as the Ohio
Constitution requires.
       {¶ 141} As the Achieve, Inc. report noted, “this may be a propitious
moment to forge a new social compact between Ohio’s government policymakers
and its education community. The terms of the compact would be relatively simple
and straightforward: governmental leaders will commit to fix the funding system




                                         53
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




and provide adequate time and resources to enable educators to develop the skills
they need to teach to higher standards, in return for which the education community
will agree to be held accountable for making annual, measurable progress in helping
virtually all young people meet higher academic standards.
       “***
       “ * * * Now is the time for Ohio’s governmental, educational, and corporate
leaders to forge a new agreement to enable local communities and their schools to
move forward to realize those goals.”
       {¶ 142} Governor Taft is providing the leadership to establish this compact,
and now is the time for the General Assembly, educators, corporate leaders, and
parents to join his efforts. As a result of this combined effort, Ohio can succeed in
providing all young people with a thorough and efficient system of public schools
pursuant to Section 2, Article VI of the Ohio Constitution.
       {¶ 143} We affirm those portions of the trial court decision that are
consistent with the foregoing opinion. We decline to appoint a special master to
oversee the state’s further efforts to comply with Section 2, Article VI. This court
will maintain continuing jurisdiction. The matter is continued to June 15, 2001, at
which time this court will establish a briefing schedule.
                                                                        So ordered.
       DOUGLAS, F.E. SWEENEY and PFEIFER, JJ., concur.
       DOUGLAS and F.E. SWEENEY, JJ., concur separately.
       PFEIFER, J., concurs separately.
       MOYER, C.J., COOK and LUNDBERG STRATTON, JJ., dissent.
       COOK, J., separately dissents.
                              __________________
       DOUGLAS, J., concurring.
       {¶ 144} On March 24, 1997, this court released the opinion in DeRolph v.
State (1997), 78 Ohio St.3d 193, 677 N.E.2d 733 (“DeRolph I”). The opinion




                                          54
                                      January Term, 2000




included a strong dissent severely castigating the majority for violating the
separation of powers doctrine and for deciding a nonjusticiable question. Id. at
264-283, 677 N.E.2d at 780-795. Joining this chorus were the then Governor of
Ohio, the leaders and some other members of the General Assembly, several large
Ohio newspapers through their reporting and editorial facilities, and a few
representatives of business interests. The message was always the same—there is
a crazy majority in the Ohio Supreme Court and, with the school-funding decision,
Armageddon is at hand. Notwithstanding all of that clamor and criticism,3 the
DeRolph I majority remained silent even though the temptation to respond was
great. It is now fair to say that, three years later, the world has not come to an end,
the republic has survived, and there is light at the end of the tunnel.
         {¶ 145} Admittedly, the tunnel is long, the road remains full of potholes,
and the ultimate success of the journey is still in doubt, but we at least are on our
way. I believe that any fair-minded observer of the controversy would have to
admit that sans DeRolph I we would not have progressed to the point at which we
find ourselves today. Due at least in part to DeRolph I, thousands of Ohio’s young
citizens attending schools, teachers, principals, superintendents, and other
administrators are better off educationally than they were three years ago. Of
course, as with every contested issue, some will say that not enough has been done
and others will say that we have now reached the golden gates and no further action
is needed. All we can do, as Justice Resnick has so well done, is to take the facts
as they are presented to us, apply the law, and then reach a decision that
accommodates without capitulation, sheds light rather than heat, and constructively
builds rather than destroys. Unfortunately, not everyone joins us in this quest on
behalf of Ohio’s education system.


3. Canon 3(B)(2) of the Code of Judicial Conduct states that “[a] judge shall be faithful to the law
and maintain professional competence in it. A judge shall not be swayed by partisan interests, public
clamor, or fear of criticism.”




                                                 55
                                   SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




         {¶ 146} The dissenters herein, once again, criticize the majority for doing
anything—then criticize us for not doing enough. They can’t have it both ways,
and the majority opinion, recognizing this dichotomy, strikes a balance by, in
specifics, respectfully pointing out the constitutional shortcomings of the General
Assembly’s remedial efforts while refraining from mandating a particular course of
action. In doing so the majority further respects and recognizes that it is the right
and prerogative, as well as the sworn sacred duty, of the members of the General
Assembly to put in place the nuts and bolts of our state’s educational system. In
this regard, many of the proposals of the Ohio Coalition for Equity and Adequacy
of School Funding, such as “A Call To Build: Appropriate 21st Century School
Facilities” (Apr. 2000), while well-documented and well-researched, are specifics
(details) to be debated and decided by the General Assembly rather than this court.
Our sole mission is to see to it that the Constitution is honored and that Section 2,
Article VI of the Ohio Constitution is being obeyed.4 When it has been, we should
say so. When it has not—then it is our duty to say that too.
         {¶ 147} Central to all of this is the role of Governor Bob Taft. As we have
seen in other states,5 Governors can be and are the players, more than any other
persons or institutions, with the standing and clout to shape the direction of
policymaking in education. The only caveat is that a Governor must choose to lead.
Ours has! The attention he and his staff have devoted to the school facilities


4. It is well to repeat just what this section of the Constitution provides—as opposed to what a
number of pundits have tried to make it say: “The general assembly shall make such provisions, by
taxation, or otherwise, as, with the income arising from the school trust fund, will secure a thorough
and efficient system of common schools throughout the State.” (Emphasis added.)

5. To date the Supreme Courts of sixteen of our sister states have found their state’s school funding
system unconstitutional, interpreting language in their Constitutions that is, in many, exactly or
remarkably like the words used in our Ohio Constitution. See DeRolph I, 78 Ohio St.3d at 204, 677
N.E.2d at 741 (naming fourteen states); see, also, Claremont School Dist. v. Governor (1997), 142
N.H. 462, 703 A.2d 1353; Opinion of the Justices No. 338 (Ala.1993), 624 So.2d 107. In addition,
twelve other states have school funding litigation pending at some level. Viewing these statistics,
it would seem that our action in DeRolph I was not such an aberration after all.




                                                 56
                                January Term, 2000




problem has been extraordinary. He has chosen to immerse himself personally in
the never-ending death struggle that generally comes before passage of anything
worthwhile in education. He has lent and continues to lend credence to the age-old
adage that Governors “usually get what they want.” It is not unconstitutional to say
that with his leadership “all things are possible.”
       {¶ 148} It is also fair to say that with the notable exception of the dissenters
herein, a number of the severest critics of the majority decision in DeRolph I have
responsibly moved to help decision-makers reach consensus on many of the
divisive issues. Significant, among others, was the lead editorial in The Columbus
Dispatch of Thursday, April 13, 2000, titled “Classroom Math.”               The first
paragraph said that “Gov. Bob Taft’s proposal to spend $1 billion in the next two
years to fix or replace deteriorating school buildings in the state deserves full
support in the General Assembly.” The last paragraph said, “Clearly, Ohio’s
leaders have taken the court’s ruling seriously and have reoriented state priorities
to put education needs at the top of the list.” Such pronouncements have not gone
unnoticed or unappreciated.
       {¶ 149} While much more could be said, in writing now I confine myself to
two specific matters. I believe that these matters lie at the heart of the next phase
of the continued quest for a constitutional funding system that strives, at the very
least, for an equal opportunity for all of Ohio’s school-age students to receive a
basic “thorough and efficient” education.
                                          I
                       Am. Sub. H.B. No. 650 (“H.B. 650”)
                       Am. Sub. H.B. No. 770 (“H.B. 770”)
       {¶ 150} As so well set out by Justice Resnick in the lead opinion, H.B. 650,
as supplemented by H.B. 770, is the cornerstone of the General Assembly’s school-
funding-formula remedy. While the lead opinion properly points out a number of
remaining concerns with this legislative remedy, I also join the majority opinion




                                          57
                              SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




because I, somewhat differently, believe that the General Assembly has made a
good-faith effort at progress and that we should give its handiwork time to prove
itself worthy and, if the effort falls short, then there is time enough for the Governor
and the legislature to fine-tune, tinker with, and/or scrap what has been done in their
(and our) incessant search to do what is constitutional, necessary, and right.
        {¶ 151} For me the heart of H.B. 650 is the “caps” formula. The General
Assembly had to balance the complexities of urban districts, poor districts, wealthy
districts, and districts with growing and declining enrollment. Just as with shoes,
no one size fits all. Thus the initial nine-and-one-half-percent and eleven-percent
caps for the first effective year and the ten-percent and twelve-percent caps for the
next year were necessary both fiscally and logistically. While the caps appear to
help some districts and hurt some districts, a real start has been made and, for me,
the redeeming feature is that all caps roll off in the year 2002 when the formula will
take full effect. At that time, if I understand the formula, major increases in state-
funded support will then take effect in a number of our state’s neediest school
districts.
        {¶ 152} Is that soon enough? Will the level of support be adequate? Can
those districts in trouble survive the wait? Districts in the greatest need, and there
are more than one hundred, will answer “no.” Those persons in charge of making
policy and finding the finances to make progress will answer “yes.” The majority
of this court answers “maybe,” and therein lies the reasoning for the one-year grace
period provided in the lead opinion.
        {¶ 153} Obviously, this counsels patience. I recognize that Ludwig Börne
(1786-1837), a German political author and satirist, had a point when he once said,
“Not through patience, but through impatience, are peoples liberated.”             The
International Dictionary of Thoughts (1969) 543. However, Edmund Burke (1729-
1797), an eighteenth-century British statesman, political writer, and orator, allowed
that “[o]ur patience will achieve more than our force.” Id. With patience acorns




                                          58
                                January Term, 2000




become oak trees; aggregate, sand, and cement become concrete; and revolutions
spawn democracies. Force, on the other hand, even if available, is to be eschewed
as only compounding an already difficult problem. John Milton (1608-1674), the
English poet, was instructive when he counseled that “[w]ho overcomes by force,
hath overcome but half his foe.” Id. at 298.
       {¶ 154} While the education revolution, in which we are all engaged, seems
to be endless, it is well to remember the progress that has been made in just the
three short years since DeRolph I, especially when compared with the twenty-one-
year period (and before) since this court issued its decision in Cincinnati School
Dist. Bd. of Edn. v. Walter (1979), 58 Ohio St.2d 368, 12 O.O.3d 327, 390 N.E.2d
813.
       {¶ 155} Is there still work to be done? Yes—substantial—which brings me
to my second issue.
                                         II
                      Overreliance on Local Property Taxes
       {¶ 156} In Part III(E) of the majority opinion, Justice Resnick, ably and
without flourish, lays out the brutal facts. Those facts and the conclusions to which
they lead are inescapable. When the foundation of a structure is weak and is built
on shifting sand, the structure is doomed to fall. While well-meaning at its
inception and effectively marketed (by those who would avoid their responsibility)
under the rubric of local control, heavy reliance on local property taxes for school
funding is the inherent weakness in the foundation and, inevitably, the structure
will continue to fall—piece by piece—until this difficult issue is met, at least in
part, head-on.
       {¶ 157} None would dispute the importance of education to the very
existence of democracy. Scholarly commentators at home and abroad (Alexis de
Tocqueville and Baron Acton, to name two) often made the point that our education
system in America, open to all regardless of rank or residence in our society,




                                         59
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




favorably set us apart from life in European societies. How then has our system, at
one time so widely acclaimed, grown progressively weaker? While it is contended
that there are other reasons such as lack of accountability, waste, control by others
than school boards and administrators, family failures and discipline, it must also
be conceded, I believe, by any fair-minded observer that funding, and the method
of funding, also factors large into the equation. This should not surprise us, as the
problem is not of recent vintage.
       {¶ 158} It is interesting to note that from the beginning of our republic, the
method for funding public education did not support the goal of having an equal
and open educational opportunity for all. In 1777, when Thomas Jefferson was
Governor of Virginia, he shepherded through the House of Burgesses a bill whose
purpose was “For the Greater Diffusion of Knowledge.” Unfortunately, and it is a
familiar story in many of our United States, the Virginia legislature did not provide
an adequate funding structure to support the legislation Jefferson had caused to be
enacted.   Sometime later, in the 1820s and just before Jefferson’s death, he
recognized the weak and faulty foundation of educational funding when he
lamented the actions of his beloved state by expressing his disappointment that the
legislature had not provided commonwealth-wide taxes to support education but,
instead, had provided an educational funding system based on local, town-by-town
taxation. Jefferson said that such a system would never work because the wealthier
towns in the commonwealth would never support the education of those children
who found themselves in the poorer towns of the commonwealth. That was one
hundred eighty years ago, and, as in so many other venues where we hark back to
the revered genius of Monticello, we again find him right. This is where we have
found ourselves for a long time in our state, and all that has happened is that the
problem has grown worse. This is where we found ourselves at the time of Walter
(1979) and DeRolph I (1997). And this is where we still find ourselves today.




                                         60
                                  January Term, 2000




        {¶ 159} For whatever reason, the General Assembly has chosen to ignore
this basic fundamental problem and our request that something be done to reverse
the course of heavy reliance on local property taxes. In fact, since DeRolph I, the
problem has been exacerbated. Local share of total funding vis-à-vis state share of
total funding has increased since 1997. All the while, since our decision in March
1997, not only was the local tax issue ignored, but also the General Assembly has
given tax refunds of $1,257,474,801 to Ohio citizens that, I would venture to say,
most Ohioans (including me) didn’t even realize we were receiving. If even one-
half of that sum had been applied to the total $6,000,000,000 of local real estate
and personal property taxes paid to support our common schools, a one-time
reduction of ten percent of those taxes could have been realized with the promise
that we are moving in the right direction (a dollar-for-dollar shift to sales and
income taxes) and that more effort would follow. Instead, we see yet today that
there is talk in the General Assembly of yet another tax refund of millions and
millions of dollars with no consideration being given to the fundamental problem
that causes the lack of equal protection (opportunity) for all of Ohio’s elementary
and secondary students.
        {¶ 160} In March of this year, one hundred sixty-one school districts in
Ohio had to seek additional local funds from their voters to operate, repair, and/or
build their schools. The passage rate was sixty-eight percent. Thus it is clear that
the citizens of Ohio are doing and are prepared to do their part. Notwithstanding
this, an overwhelming majority of these good citizens have asked this court for our
help because others have been unresponsive. Well over five hundred of Ohio’s six
hundred eleven school districts are party plaintiffs in this suit. The response of the
dissenters herein, who so severely take us to task for having a different view than
they do, is, “Just stay out of it.”
        {¶ 161} In 1996, at the Jesse Fell Lecture Series at Illinois State University,
Distinguished Professor Emeritus George Alan Karnes Wallis Hickrod said that




                                          61
                                  SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




“[w]e have a society that is increasingly unequal, we have schools that are
increasingly unequal, and if we do not do something about it we will end up with
an increasingly well educated ‘elite’ and an increasingly poorly educated
‘underclass.’ No responsible observer that I know expects democracy to do well
under those conditions.” Our mission statement cannot be better stated. The cause
of educational opportunity is a noble one. We should not shrink from our duty. In
order to meet the dictates of Section 2, Article VI of the Ohio Constitution, the
General Assembly must, as Governor Engler and the legislature did in the state of
Michigan, actively pursue a solution to the continued heavy overreliance on local
property taxes for school funding. Unless and until that happens, it is difficult to
see how any legislative response would make this case go away—a hope that all
involved fondly cherish.
                                                III
         {¶ 162} It is easy to criticize. It is far more difficult to be a problem-solver
than a problem maker. The majority herein prefers to be problem-solvers by
helping the Governor and General Assembly solve a problem that, by any objective
appraisal and appraiser, has existed for far too long. The dissenters would continue
the status quo by simply saying “Let George do it.”6 Well, my valued colleagues,
“George” hasn’t done it! It is obvious that “George” was nowhere to be found until
our decision in DeRolph I. Now the dissenters would have us say “all is well” when
even they know that would be calumny of the first order.
         {¶ 163} The prophets of gloom and doom have now declared that they were
right. The court should just have ignored the plaintiffs and their hard evidence and
given only a wink to our Constitution. They warned us, they say, thus attempting
to bring about their own self-fulfilling prophecy. But where would the kids and




6. “George” is generic in nature and makes reference to no particular individual, dead or alive.




                                                62
                                January Term, 2000




school system of this state be today if the dissenters in DeRolph I had prevailed?
Just to ask the question answers it. I, very respectfully, concur.
       F.E. SWEENEY, J., concurs in the foregoing concurring opinion.
                               __________________
       PFEIFER, J., concurring.
       {¶ 164} Two very different constitutional interpretations and consequential
courses of action are again laid out by the members of this court.
       {¶ 165} There is, of course, the simple and efficient alternative
constitutional interpretation offered by Chief Justice Moyer and Justices Cook and
Lundberg Stratton. Despite the state’s failure ever to advance this theory, my
dissenting colleagues continue to argue that Section 2, Article VI of the Ohio
Constitution has no discernible meaning, or if it has meaning, it is up to the General
Assembly rather than this court to interpret its meaning and decide upon
compliance.
       {¶ 166} In doing so, the dissenters pay no heed to Cincinnati City School
Dist. Bd. of Edn. v. Walter (1979), 58 Ohio St.2d 368, 384, 12 O.O.3d 327, 336,
390 N.E.2d 813, 824, where this court stated that “the issue concerning legislation
passed by the General Assembly pursuant to Section 2, Article VI of the Ohio
Constitution presents a justiciable controversy.” In the dissenters’ view, this court
is unable to interpret the phrase “thorough and efficient” and should therefore not
even try. But, see, id., 58 Ohio St.2d at 383, 12 O.O.3d at 336, 390 N.E.2d at 823
(“We wish to state clearly at the outset that this court has the authority, and indeed
the duty, to review legislation to determine its constitutionality under the
Constitution of Ohio and to declare statutes inoperative.”). Instead, my dissenting
colleagues would essentially throw up their hands in dismay at the difficulty of
interpreting two rather common words: “thorough” and “efficient” are, after all,
used every day by both common and uncommon people.




                                         63
                               SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




       {¶ 167} Their approach strikes at the core of constitutional law, that courts
are the final arbiters of what the Constitution means, which was decided long ago.
See Marbury v. Madison (1803), 5 U.S. (1 Cranch) 137, 2 L.Ed. 60. See, also,
Walter, 58 Ohio St.2d at 383, 12 O.O.3d at 336, 390 N.E.2d at 823 (“The doctrine
of judicial review is so well established that it is beyond cavil.”).
       {¶ 168} They quote one college professor, a legal encyclopedia, and a
second-year law student. They do not, however, mention Marbury or any of the
hundreds, perhaps thousands, of cases decided in this country, in which judges have
declared federal or state legislation to be unconstitutional. They essentially state
that the Thorough and Efficient Clause is little more than an aspiration, even if it is
part of Ohio’s Constitution.
       {¶ 169} It is a very tidy solution—simple, efficient and inexpensive.
Unfortunately, it would turn two hundred years of constitutional jurisprudence,
dating back to Marbury v. Madison, on its head. It also would allow the General
Assembly to continue to disregard the section of the Constitution that mandates a
“thorough and efficient” education system. See Miller v. Korns (1923), 107 Ohio
St. 287, 297-298, 140 N.E. 773, 776.
       {¶ 170} Despite the protestations of my dissenting colleagues and some
members of the General Assembly, this court’s decision in DeRolph v. State (1997),
78 Ohio St.3d 193, 677 N.E.2d 733, is binding legal authority in this state.
Subsequent to the announcement of this court’s March 24, 1997 DeRolph decision,
the General Assembly has slowly embarked on a course of action that addressed
some well-documented deficiencies in Ohio’s system of public education, but only
marginally confronted the constitutional shortcomings that are at the core of this
case. Specific and detailed guidance is apparently required, and now possibly is
even desired by the General Assembly.




                                          64
                                  January Term, 2000




        {¶ 171} “The general assembly shall make such provisions * * * as * * *
will secure a thorough and efficient system of common schools throughout the
state.” Section 2, Article VI, Constitution of the State of Ohio.
        {¶ 172} The first step toward constitutional compliance is monumental. It
requires acceptance of the fact that the simple declaration of Section 2 was intended
by the framers to, and therefore does, require a specific and ongoing duty to act.
Presumably, a respect for the Ohio Constitution and for this court’s duty to interpret
it will help foster that realization.
        {¶ 173} The second step, setting statewide minimum educational
requirements, while subject to continued revision, is seemingly in place and not the
subject of dispute in this case. The State Department of Education and the General
Assembly have determined what constitutes a basic education. This court has not
been a part of that discussion. The reason that DeRolph is here is not because the
state does not know what it takes to provide a basic education, but because some
children are not receiving what the state has determined that they need. For
example, setting minimum requirements for the availability of basic modern
textbooks and computers does not meet the mandate of Section 2, Article VI when
those standards are simply not met for many school children. It is the duty of the
state to ensure actual compliance with its own standards.
        {¶ 174} Assessing the cost of those basic requirements is where the state
continues to stumble. Compliance with minimum requirements would necessarily
entail a certain threshold minimum cost. Here the state did understand this court in
DeRolph and undertook the task of determining minimum cost. However, new
programming and other new mandated local school expenditures were not included
in the calculation. The incomplete minimum cost in dollar value, having been
determined, was then fractionally reduced and then complete compliance was
deferred for several years. Finally, no provision was made to update this financial
cost measurement for each biannual budget.




                                          65
                              SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




        {¶ 175} The bedrock constitutional challenge undertaken in this case
focuses on the horrible funding inequities that persist between school districts in
Ohio due to the state’s heavy reliance on local property taxes in formulating the
school foundation formula. That was the constitutional tripwire in DeRolph I and
could not have been set forth more forcefully by this court. It is in conquering this
colossus that the General Assembly decided to polish up the existing formula,
declare victory, and call in their legal team without attempting the climb.
        {¶ 176} Local property taxes raise such a mountain of money that it is not
realistic to expect total replacement. That is not what the Constitution requires, nor
was it suggested by this court. What is required is an immediate good faith effort
to comply with the Constitution.
        {¶ 177} Getting there is fourth grade math. First, determine an honest per-
pupil current minimum operating cost. Next, determine the minimum property tax
millage rate that every school district in Ohio will be expected to collect in support
of the minimum operating cost. Finally, fill the gaps by adopting a minimum state
school foundation formula that lifts every school district and school student in this
state to the minimum dollar target beginning this next school year. Those simple
steps, properly completed, will bring the state to the threshold of constitutional
compliance. It is not a very high place.
        {¶ 178} There will still be room for a supplemental education budget that
allows legislators to provide, on a rational basis, extra state funds for all the special
needs of children in circumstances that merit targeted funding.
        {¶ 179} Tracking in tandem with these school-funding issues are the
considerable school facilities deficiencies. While the school building problems are
much easier to visualize, they are somewhat harder to fit into a mold of
constitutional compliance or noncompliance. Unfortunately, school facilities have
become so desperate that Ohio has been ranked at or near the bottom of the nation




                                           66
                                January Term, 2000




by outside observers of these conditions. It is the shame of low rankings rather than
the hammer of this litigation that has prompted legislative action.
       {¶ 180} Is the state’s commitment large enough, fast enough, or certain
enough? Certainty is a constitutional impossibility, given a constitutionally
mandated two-year budget cycle.        The dollar amount is large, but so is the
documented need. Section 2, Article VI would appear to be met by a plan that
commits the state to a timely path of remediation and includes a method for constant
review of the need and for acceleration of assistance when warranted.
       {¶ 181} This case is not about high standards. It is about a constitutionally
required foundation of basic educational opportunity. The difficulty lies not in
building that foundation, but in sustaining a democracy without it.
                               __________________
       MOYER, C.J., dissenting.
       {¶ 182} The sole issue now before us, as it was in DeRolph v. State (1997), 78
Ohio St.3d 193, 677 N.E.2d 733 (“DeRolph I”), is whether the Ohio General
Assembly has violated the words and intent of the Ohio Constitution that require it to
“make such provisions, by taxation or otherwise, as * * * will secure a thorough and
efficient system of common schools throughout the State.” Section 2, Article VI of
the Ohio Constitution. In DeRolph I a majority of this court held that Ohio school-
financing laws then in place did not comply with this constitutional provision.
       {¶ 183} I, along with Justices Cook and Lundberg Stratton, dissented,
recognizing that the General Assembly had in fact established a statewide school
system in which schools were open, teachers were teaching, buses were running,
and all Ohio children had available to them an opportunity to learn. Our dissent
was based on our conviction that resolution of issues of the level and method of
school funding is dependent upon judgments regarding the quality of education to
be provided by the state.      It was further grounded on our firm belief that
constitutional history, precedent, and logic warrant the conclusion that those




                                         67
                                SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




qualitative judgments should be committed to the will of the people as expressed in
the election of representatives to the General Assembly and local school boards and
in the determination of voted taxation issues to support the schools. In short, the
determination of what constitutes minimum levels of educational opportunity to be
provided to Ohio’s children is committed by the Ohio Constitution to legitimate
policy makers—not the courts, whose proper role is interpretation and application
of law.
          {¶ 184} The wide divergence of opinion between the majority and the
minority members of this court as to proper interpretation of the Thorough and
Efficient Clause, as manifested in the various separate opinions in DeRolph I, remains.
I continue to believe that decisions regarding the level of educational quality to be
made available to Ohio school children are dependent upon policy decisions—
political, budgetary, and value judgments—that require a balancing of interests that is
not appropriately struck in the Supreme Court of Ohio. “The judicial branch is simply
neither equipped nor empowered to make these kinds of decisions.” DeRolph I, 78
Ohio St.3d at 269, 677 N.E.2d at 785-786 (Moyer, C.J., dissenting).
          {¶ 185} Today the majority, having examined the current statutory school-
funding system, acknowledges that significant steps have been taken since our
decision in DeRolph I by the General Assembly, as well as by two Ohio Governors,
to improve public elementary and secondary education in our state. The majority
summarizes a multitude of initiatives adopted by the executive and legislative
branches in recent years to improve school quality in Ohio, and specifically recognizes
that the General Assembly has taken steps to “formulate a viable plan to fund the
construction of new school facilities and to repair” physical deficiencies in Ohio
school buildings. The majority recognizes the complexity of the educational system,
and describes the task of reforming that system as one of “unparalleled magnitude.”
          {¶ 186} What the majority fails to fully recount is the magnitude of the state’s
monetary commitment to education. Pursuant to the Classroom Facilities Act, from




                                            68
                                 January Term, 2000




1990 to May 1998, twenty-three new construction projects had been completed and
fourteen more were under construction. The General Assembly has earmarked $1.6
billion for the School Facilities Commission for classroom facilities improvements
since DeRolph I. Funding for technology improvements in the schools totaled $256
million at the time of trial before the common pleas court in 1998, 1997 Am.Sub.S.B.
No. 215, Section 69, with additional funding of $196 million appropriated in 1999,
Am.Sub.H.B. No. 282, Section 11. The General Assembly has provided a $50 million
textbook subsidy for all but the wealthiest school districts, 1997 Am.Sub.H.B. No.
215, Sections 50 and 50.16. Since fiscal year 1991, the Department of Education has
received the largest increase in state dollars of any agency, totaling approximately
$1.7 billion, and receives more state money than any other agency or department in
the state.
        {¶ 187} Nevertheless, although the majority acknowledges progress in
achieving the criteria set in DeRolph I, including significant initiatives and
developments, it concludes that “a great deal of work has yet to be done before Ohio
can be said to have a constitutional thorough and efficient system of public schools.”
        {¶ 188} The majority retains jurisdiction of this case for at least another year,
after which it will again scrutinize the public school statutory framework in light of
its own unpredictable and indefinite concepts of educational thoroughness and
efficiency. In the interim, the General Assembly and the executive branch of
government are asked to further improve the system, in accordance with direction
created by the majority which remains vague and generalized. In so doing, and while
recognizing that the coequal executive and legislative branches of government have
acted in good faith to comply with DeRolph I, the majority in effect claims veto power
over policy determinations made by the General Assembly, thereby reserving to itself
ultimate authority over public educational policy within the state.
        {¶ 189} In DeRolph I, our joint dissent expressed the view that the majority
had failed to provide the General Assembly with sufficient guidance for creating a




                                           69
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




constitutional school-financing system and noted that “[a]spirational phrases urging
that state financing of educational systems enable citizens to ‘fully develop their
human potential,’ and afford ‘high quality educational opportunities’ are no more
amenable to judicial interpretation or enforcement than is the term ‘thorough and
efficient.’ ” 78 Ohio St.3d at 268-269, 677 N.E.2d at 785. This criticism applies to
today’s majority opinion as well. The majority still has not clearly told the General
Assembly what “thorough and efficient” means, or what “overreliance” on property
tax is, or what would constitute the kind of educational opportunity it believes the
Ohio Constitution guarantees to every Ohio child. Instead, the majority today tells the
General Assembly once again to go back to the drawing board, while not describing
in a meaningful way what the final design must look like.
       {¶ 190} Today the majority elevates two statements from Miller v. Korns
(1923), 107 Ohio St. 287, 140 N.E. 773, to syllabus law. Paragraph one of the syllabus
provides that the General Assembly must secure not merely a system of common
schools but rather a thorough and efficient system of common schools. The second
paragraph of today’s syllabus provides that the attainment of efficiency and
thoroughness in that system is a statewide purpose, that is, efficiency and
thoroughness throughout the state are goals toward which the General Assembly
should strive. I do not object to adoption of these principles, although I remain
committed to the proposition that determination of whether Ohio’s public school
system is thorough and efficient is committed by the Constitution to the General
Assembly itself.
       {¶ 191} The third paragraph of the syllabus constitutes an attempt to define
the phrases “thorough system” and “efficient system.” The majority defines a
thorough system as one in which each and every school district has “enough” funds
to operate, and an efficient system as one in which each and every school district has
“ample” teachers and equipment, “sufficient for all students to be afforded an
educational opportunity,” as well as buildings compliant with building and fire codes.




                                          70
                                 January Term, 2000




However, in attempting to clarify the ambiguous phrase “thorough and efficient,” the
majority merely substitutes additional ambiguous and subjective criteria. Whether a
district has “enough” funds, or an “ample” number of teachers, is in the eye of the
beholder.
       {¶ 192} Moreover, I take issue with the majority’s conclusion that an efficient
system is dependent upon “each and every school district” in the state meeting the
criteria. The majority thereby shifts its focus from analysis of the educational system
to case-by-case analysis of individual school districts, and presumably individual
schools themselves. One can only infer that the majority intends to retain jurisdiction
of this case until it finds every school in the state to be thorough and efficient, even
though the Constitution requires, by its own terms, only a thorough and efficient
system—not a system in which every school is thorough and efficient.
       {¶ 193} This inference is reinforced by the majority’s recitation of instances
of deficiencies in individual schools, e.g., schools with mold-infested bathrooms, or
schools plagued by sewage problems. But problems in individual schools do not in
and of themselves demonstrate a failure of the statewide system of common schools
as a whole. For instance, William L. Phillis, executive director of the Ohio Coalition
for Equity and Adequacy of School Funding, testified at trial that he walked through
a “stream of water” and smelled the odor of sewage at Park Street Middle School, in
the South-Western City School District, where a section of a locker room in the
school’s basement had to be sealed off due to a sewage backup. However, in
November 1998, voters in the South-Western City School District approved a 4.92-
mill bond issue to build seven new schools and improve others. See South-Western
City Schools web site, http://www.swcs.k12.oh.us/construction.htm. Park Street
Middle School is to be demolished following the scheduled opening in 2001 of a new
intermediate     school,     now      under     construction.         See     id.     at
http://www.swcs.k12.oh.us/psms.htm. The statewide system of common schools in




                                          71
                                SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




effect in 1998 thus appears to have been adequate to correct the problem described by
Phillis’s anecdotal evidence.
        {¶ 194} One need not have served on a board of education to know that the
condition of the physical facilities, the quality of school learning materials, the salaries
of teachers and employees, and the efficiency of school administrators are determined,
in large measure, by decisions made in each local school district. The majority
opinion takes no account of that significant reality.
        {¶ 195} Nor do I agree that the mandate of the Constitution to the General
Assembly to establish a thorough and efficient system of common schools is
equivalent to a mandate that the General Assembly establish a state-funded system of
common schools. Even accepting the proposition that Ohio’s system of public
education is to be a “statewide system,” I disagree with the majority’s statement that
the “state is responsible for funding an adequate education for all primary and
secondary students who attend public schools.” (Emphasis added.) What words of
the Constitution preclude a system in which local school districts are held even
partially responsible for funding a basic education at local schools? An overriding
state obligation may be desirable, but the issue before us is the interpretation of a
constitutional mandate, not the desirability of a particular legislative policy.
        {¶ 196} Furthermore, such a construction is totally inconsistent with the
history of education in Ohio as well as the circumstances surrounding public
education at the time the Thorough and Efficient Clause was adopted. See DeRolph
I, 78 Ohio St.3d at 280, 677 N.E.2d at 793 (Moyer, C.J., dissenting) (“While it is true
that the framers of our Education Clause envisioned educational opportunity for all,
the framers contemporaneously acknowledged and approved of a statewide
educational system in which local districts were primarily responsible for providing
educational opportunity to their children. When the Education Clause was adopted,
determination of adequacy was dependent upon the resources available at the local




                                            72
                                  January Term, 2000




level and the amount local residents were willing to spend on educating local
children.”).
        {¶ 197} The majority includes a list of seven major areas that it asks the
General Assembly to scrutinize, and presumably change, before the majority will
relinquish jurisdiction of this case. However, the list raises questions with no answers.
        {¶ 198} For instance, the majority finds fault with continued “reliance” on
local property taxes as a “primary” means to fund Ohio’s schools. Each member of
this court may hold an opinion regarding the appropriateness of the real property tax
versus other more uniform or statewide forms of taxation, but that has never been the
test for determining the constitutionality of statutory law. The majority notes that
statewide, state funding constitutes forty-four percent of the total, excluding federal
funds, versus fifty-six percent from local funding, and implicitly finds that proportion
to be constitutionally deficient as a primary reliance or an overreliance on local
property tax, even though the majority has already conceded that property tax may be
continued as a legitimate source of school funding. DeRolph v. State (1997), 78 Ohio
St.3d 419, 419-421, 678 N.E.2d 886, 887.
        {¶ 199} Today the majority says the General Assembly has not gone far
enough in increasing the proportion of state funding to local funding, noting that “this
aspect of the former system [overreliance on local property tax] persists in the state’s
current funding plan, wholly unchanged.” (Emphasis sic.) It makes this statement
despite the fact that the poorest Ohio school districts now receive roughly ninety
percent of new construction costs in state aid, with a ten-percent local contribution.
“Reliance,” however, remains undefined, let alone “overreliance.” If the percentage
of local to state funding were inverted would that be sufficient, or is the majority
seeking only a fifty-one-percent reliance on state funds? In stating that the General
Assembly must establish a state-funded system of common schools, the majority
hints, without expressly saying, that it intends to retain jurisdiction until the property
tax component of school funding is significantly changed, or eliminated, despite its




                                           73
                              SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




earlier ruling that local property taxes could be part of a constitutionally acceptable
revised funding plan. DeRolph v. State, 78 Ohio St.3d at 419, 678 N.E.2d at 887. But
ultimately one can only guess as to the meaning of these terms.
       {¶ 200} Moreover, reliance on property tax has very little, if anything, to do
with thoroughness and efficiency. The majority explicitly observes that the flaw in
dependence on local property tax is the creation of “vast disparities among Ohio’s six
hundred eleven public school districts,” noting that it puts “property-poor districts at
a disadvantage.” But these are statements directed not to the adequacy of funding of
the public schools, but rather to the equity of the system. Indeed, the majority opinion
more than once suggests that the fundamental problem with property tax funding is
that it creates inequities.   Yet this court has previously expressly rejected the
contention that the Ohio Constitution mandates equal educational opportunity
throughout the state. DeRolph I, 78 Ohio St.3d at 211, 677 N.E.2d at 746.
       {¶ 201} Even while claiming not to be retreating from its prior mandate in
DeRolph I that the General Assembly make a “complete systematic overhaul” and
“create an entirely new school financing system,” id., 78 Ohio St.3d at 212 and 213,
677 N.E.2d at 747, the majority asks the General Assembly to give further attention
to the basic aid formula and the phenomenon of phantom revenue attributable in part
to 1976 Am.Sub.S.B. No. 920, 136 Ohio Laws, Part II, 3182, and to 1998
Am.Sub.H.B. No. 650, both of which affect local, i.e., property-tax-based school
funding. In view of the majority’s earlier position that property tax need not be
eliminated as a source of school funding, it remains unclear whether the General
Assembly can eliminate overreliance on property tax by simply fine-tuning the
underlying formulas of the current school-funding method or must instead eliminate
it.
       {¶ 202} This court has still not provided a positive definition of a thorough
and efficient system of common schools or outlined its constituent elements in a
meaningful way. The majority again today reiterates its standard for a thorough and




                                          74
                                  January Term, 2000




efficient system by quoting Miller v. Korns, 107 Ohio St. at 298, 140 N.E. at 776: “A
thorough system could not mean one in which part or any number of the school
districts of the state were starved for funds. An efficient system could not mean one
in which part or any number of the school districts of the state lacked teachers,
buildings, or equipment.” (Emphasis added.) But although hypothesizing as to what
would not be thorough and efficient, neither the Miller court nor the majority has
defined that phrase positively, except to say that an “ample” number of teachers and
“sufficient” equipment affording all students “educational opportunity” must be
provided, in buildings compliant with state building and fire codes.
        {¶ 203} Similarly, the majority notes that this court in Cincinnati School Dist.
Bd. of Edn. v. Walter (1979), 58 Ohio St.2d 368, 387, 12 O.O.3d 327, 338, 390 N.E.2d
813, 825, determined that the state’s educational system would not be deemed
thorough and efficient if school districts received so little funding from all sources that
students were “being deprived of educational opportunity.” (Emphasis added.) But
again, this phrase is inherently ambiguous and is left unclarified by the majority. Does
it mean deprivation of all educational opportunity, such as described in Miller, i.e.,
where children have no schools, no teachers, no books? If so, such a situation simply
does not currently exist in Ohio, nor did it exist at the time of DeRolph I.
        {¶ 204} I believe that the majority instead means that students in a thorough
and efficient system must be provided educational opportunities that meet a level of
quality that it, rather than the people of the state speaking through their elected
representatives, finds satisfactory. The majority is really saying that it does not think
that the minimum educational standards now in place are high enough, thereby
substituting its own judgment of educational sufficiency for constitutional analysis.
        {¶ 205} For example, the majority implies that a thorough and efficient system
of common schools providing educational opportunity to its students now includes as
a required element the provision of sufficient computers to allow students nearing
graduation to be computer-literate. Some members of the General Assembly may




                                            75
                                SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




share this view, along with Governor Taft, as demonstrated by his 2000 State of the
State Address. But that fact is of no legal relevance and does not change the fact that
decisions as to the universal provision of computers, or advanced placement courses,
or multiple foreign language offerings remain decisions of educational policy that are
appropriately made only by the legislative and executive branches of government.
        {¶ 206} I am additionally dismayed by the majority’s apparent expansion
of its view of thoroughness and efficiency beyond the issues of school financing
and improvement of physical school facilities, which was the focus of DeRolph I,
as reflected in its syllabus.
        {¶ 207} The majority cites with approval a March 1999 report of Achieve, Inc.
That report acknowledged that state education funding has increased by
approximately fifty percent, with the greatest increase in low-wealth school districts,
and recounted other “substantial new investments” in education. The report then
opines that remedying funding and spending disparities and facilities deficiencies
might not be enough, stating that other requirements of a thorough and efficient
system of education must be developed. The Achieve Report further advised that
“clear and rigorous academic standards, challenging assessments designed to measure
progress against those standards, and an accountability system that rewards success
and takes action against persistent failure” constitute the heart of education reform.
        {¶ 208} But the experts who developed the Achieve Report were reporting to
legitimate policymakers, members of the legislative and executive branches—not
judges. Indeed, Achieve, Inc. describes itself as existing to provide advice and
assistance to state policy leaders on issues of academic standards, assessment, and
accountability. The opinions contained in its report were not intended to constitute a
legal or constitutional analysis, nor are the members of the organization necessarily
competent to provide one. Nevertheless, with this report as its underpinning, the
majority expands the constitutional concept of a thorough and efficient system beyond




                                           76
                                  January Term, 2000




DeRolph I and suggests that student success is yet another criterion by which the
thoroughness and efficiency of Ohio schools is to be judged.
        {¶ 209} The majority concludes that “thoroughness and efficiency embrace
far more than simply adequate funding” and that “[e]ven if the system were very
generously funded, if other factors are ignored, it might still not be thorough and
efficient.” It states that “much more is involved in this process than merely providing
funds” before it will find Ohio’s public education system to be thorough and efficient.
Moreover, the majority states, “If students have access to the latest technology but
cannot take advantage of it, then our state has failed them. If students have the most
up-to-date textbooks but cannot comprehend the material in those books, then our
state has failed them.”
        {¶ 210} The majority’s suggestion that Ohio policymakers must establish
criteria of academic success and then assess the performance of Ohio students against
those criteria in an attempt to demonstrate accountability in order to meet the
constitutional mandate of a “thorough and efficient system,” while perhaps well
intentioned, is not constitutionally required. It thus hints that the ultimate criterion of
thoroughness and efficiency is whether some undefined percentage of Ohio students
are achieving academically.
        {¶ 211} Measurement of academic achievement is a goal we can all support,
but it is not a reasonable criterion against which the thoroughness and efficiency of
Ohio’s system of providing public schools should be judged. In my view, it is neither
appropriate nor fair to hold the educational system ultimately responsible for failings
that may be attributable to individuals, or the greater society, rather than to the
educational system itself. As noted in the joint dissent to DeRolph I, proficiency test
results are not necessarily correlated to expenditures, and external socioeconomic
factors may be more significant. 78 Ohio St.3d at 279, 677 N.E.2d at 792. See
Rodgers & Rodgers, Centralized Wisdom? DeRolph v. State and the Rise of Judicial
Paternalism (1997), 45 Cleve.St.L.Rev. 753, 765-766, citing various research findings




                                            77
                               SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




supporting this conclusion, including a Cleveland Plain Dealer analysis concluding
that “factors related to families and economic opportunity—not school districts—
most influence how well students perform on standardized tests.” See, also, Traub,
What No School Can Do, New York Times Magazine (Jan. 16, 2000) 52, 54-55
(“[M]oney does not buy educational equality. Although the premise of many a
crusading volume, including Jonathan Kozol’s ‘Savage Inequalities,’ is that ghetto
schools have been allowed to rot, many of the most catastrophically failing school
districts, like Newark’s [New Jersey], spend far more money per student than do
middle-class communities nearby. Labor economists have had a field day proving
that school spending is not correlated with school achievement.”).
        {¶ 212} I also take issue with the majority’s discussion of the process and
possible motivations by which the General Assembly arrived at the figure of $4,063
for FY99 as the base cost of an adequate education. It is of no consequence to this
court or to its constitutional analysis how the General Assembly produced the
legislation we review. It is our responsibility to examine only the final result in light
of the Constitution. Laws adopted by the General Assembly need not be perfect, nor
is the method or motives by which they are created of any judicial concern.
        {¶ 213} Even assuming that they are of our concern, why is the majority so
averse to placing its confidence in a Governor who has dramatically and effectively
expressed his deep commitment to improving public education in Ohio and in a
General Assembly that has increased public expenditures at record levels? The work
is their work to do. I have confidence in their will and in their ability to do it.
                                       Conclusion
        {¶ 214} In DeRolph I the majority placed itself in the constitutionally
uncomfortable position of ordering the General Assembly to pass remedial legislation.
Today’s majority opinion oversteps the bounds of appropriate judicial review of
legislative enactments, going so far as to decree that the General Assembly give its
“undivided attention” to realizing the majority’s vision of constitutionally adequate




                                            78
                                  January Term, 2000




public education, even while purporting to give deference to the principle that it is this
court’s role to “decide issues of constitutionality—not to legislate.” Such an
admonition of a supreme court to a legislature is not appropriate. So long as the
majority reserves ultimate veto power over any new funding system, its protest that it
is not retaining control over educational policy in Ohio should convince no one.
        {¶ 215} The majority states that “educators, lawmakers, businesses, parents,
and students must all work together to strengthen Ohio’s system of public schools.”
No person who cares about education, and I and my fellow dissenting justices do
indeed care deeply about education, is likely to disagree with this expression of such
a laudable goal. However, in the final analysis, that declaration constitutes the
expression of the majority’s estimation of good public policy; it has nothing to do with
constitutional law.
        {¶ 216} The majority’s disposition of this case is legally unwarranted and
inappropriate. See Rodgers, supra, 45 Cleve.St.L.Rev. at 753-754 (stating that this
court’s decision in DeRolph I is “dangerous precedent, inasmuch as it dispirits the
sacrosanct role a legislature assumes in a democratic society and overtly legitimizes
judicial policymaking” and its “vision of a thorough and efficient school system, via
more economic parity, ultimately undermines the General Assembly of the State and
will not extricate Ohio schools,” while further predicting that the decision will
“markedly fail to advance the quality of the Ohio public school system”).
        {¶ 217} Our fear as dissenters in DeRolph I, 78 Ohio St.3d at 270, 677 N.E.2d
at 786, that the judicial intervention in development of state educational policy that
the majority began would necessitate deeper judicial involvement over time is
unfortunately being realized. This case is now over eight years old, with no end in
sight. The likelihood of protracted judicial supervision over public education by this
court for many years to come appears certain. The majority’s failure to define
educational thoroughness and efficiency, while taking the position that it will know it




                                           79
                              SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




when it sees it, only makes it more likely, if not certain, that judicial involvement will
continue indefinitely.
        {¶ 218} The appellees did not demonstrate a violation of the Ohio
Constitution in 1997 when DeRolph I was decided, nor have they in the record before
us. I therefore respectfully dissent.
        COOK and LUNDBERG STRATTON, JJ., concur in the foregoing dissenting
opinion.
                                __________________
        COOK, J., dissenting.
        {¶ 219} I view the majority opinions in DeRolph I and now DeRolph II as
proceeding from a faulty premise—that Ohio’s Thorough and Efficient Clause
provides the basis for this court to continually veto and/or revise the policy
decisions of our coequal branch, the General Assembly.
        {¶ 220} Professor David Mayer of Capital University advances the
argument that the premise is faulty by analogizing Ohio’s Thorough and Efficient
Clause to the clause in the United States Constitution that empowers Congress to
“provide for the common Defence.” David N. Mayer, DeRolph School Funding
Ruling Goes Against Bedrock Principles, Toledo Blade (Sept. 12, 1998); see, also,
Section 8, Article I, United States Constitution. The two clauses are structurally
similar—both include the directive word “shall.” Mayer suggests that we imagine
the federal courts declaring the military budget unconstitutional based on the
“common Defence” provision. This is implausible enough, Mayer notes, but would
the United States Supreme Court then order Congress to prioritize a certain defense
system above all other national budgetary concerns and give Congress a year to
allocate sufficient funds? As Mayer concludes, such an order would be “absurd—
a flagrant intrusion by one branch of government upon the prerogatives of another
branch.” Id.




                                           80
                                 January Term, 2000




        {¶ 221} Our case suffers, at its core, from the same absurdity.             That
absurdity is why this court will continue to find itself, as it does today, in a quagmire
concerning its role in remedying the unconstitutionality that it finds. Today this
court publishes an opinion that concedes on one page that its role is “not to
legislate” but merely to “decide issues of constitutionality,” and on another page
asserts the power to “require a revision” of the General Assembly’s enactments.
        {¶ 222} Instead of compounding our errors, we ought to use this, our second
review of the merits of the constitutionality claim, to acknowledge our prior
misjudgment. We should be conceding in this opinion that the Thorough and
Efficient Clause is so imprecise and so incapable of adequate and meaningful
enforcement that it is not self-executing. See State v. Williams (2000), 88 Ohio
St.3d 513, 728 N.E.2d 342. Like the constitutional declaration we examined only
recently in Williams—that all Ohio citizens possess inalienable rights to life,
liberty, property, happiness, and safety—the Thorough and Efficient Clause is
standardless and incomplete. Id. “[A] constitutional provision which depends upon
legislative action for its effectiveness is ipso facto not self-executing * * *.” 16
American Jurisprudence 2d (1998), Constitutional Law, Section 103.
        {¶ 223} Even if the non-self-executing Thorough and Efficient Clause
could be the basis for this court’s finding that certain legislation is void, it does not
follow that this court—as opposed to the General Assembly, to which the
constitutional provision is directed—has any role in fashioning a remedy for a
violation. American Jurisprudence cites an Ohio Supreme Court case for this
proposition of constitutional law: “Even if a constitutional provision contains a
mandatory requirement that the legislature adopt a particular provision, there is no
remedy if the legislature fails to obey * * *. [I]t is for the legislature to choose the
time and form for carrying out the command.” (Emphasis added.) Id., Section 99,
citing Ursuline Academy of Cleveland v. Bd. of Tax Appeals (1943), 141 Ohio St.
563, 26 O.O. 152, 49 N.E.2d 674, overruled in part on other grounds by Denison




                                           81
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




Univ. v. Bd. of Tax Appeals (1965), 2 Ohio St.2d 17, 31 O.O.2d 10, 205 N.E.2d
896; Palmer v. Bd. of Edn. of Union Free School Dist. No. 2, Town of Geddes,
Onondaga Cty. (1937), 276 N.Y. 222, 11 N.E.2d 887.
       {¶ 224} I have raised this point in a prior dissent. DeRolph v. State (1998),
83 Ohio St.3d 1208, 1209, 699 N.E.2d 516, 517 (Cook, J., dissenting) (“Nor can
this court alter the balance of constitutional power by ordering the legislature to
pass new laws as part of a ‘remedy.’ ”). I do so again because I view this court’s
ill-conceived foray outside its legitimate role to be a most serious affront to
individual freedom and democratic ideals. By not abiding by the American form
of government, we invite a lessening of public trust in the court as an institution.
                               __________________




                                         82

§ derolph-iii
title: DeRolph III, 2001, at 93 Ohio St
effective: 
legislation: https://www.supremecourt.ohio.gov/rod/docs/pdf/0/2001/2001-ohio-1343.pdf
--
[This decision has been published in Ohio Official Reports at 93 Ohio St.3d 309.]




    DEROLPH ET AL., APPELLEES, v. THE STATE OF OHIO ET AL., APPELLANTS.
                     [Cite as DeRolph v. State, 2001-Ohio-1343.]
Constitutional law—Education—Schools—School-funding formula adopted by
        General Assembly modified by Supreme Court to meet test for constitutionality
        created in DeRolph I and DeRolph II.
       (No. 99-570—Submitted June 20, 2001—Decided September 6, 2001.)
                   Common Pleas Court of Perry County, No. 22043.
            DECISION AND ORDER on Exercise of Continuing Jurisdiction.
                                  __________________
        MOYER, C.J.
        {¶ 1} Since it was first docketed in this court in 1995, this dispute has
produced from this court no fewer than three signed majority opinions, a per curiam
opinion, eleven separate concurrences and dissents, and a number of rulings on
motions filed by plaintiffs and defendants. Every justice of the court has expressed
her and his views regarding the constitutional issue that once again is presented for
our disposition nearly six years after the court exercised its discretionary
jurisdiction to review the merits. The written opinions of the justices reflect deeply
held beliefs regarding the responsibility of the court as an institution and the
principles that define the framework by which each justice decides issues brought
to the court. The informal and formal discussions among the justices regarding the
jurisdictional and merit issues have been of an intensity and duration unmatched by
any other case.
        {¶ 2} The range of the opinions that reflect the decisional process is broad.
For instance, some of us believe that the court exceeded its proper role in addressing
the merits of this case, DeRolph v. State (1997), 78 Ohio St.3d 193, 264-283, 677
N.E.2d 733, 782-795 (“DeRolph I”) (Moyer, C.J., Cook and Lundberg Stratton, JJ.,
                              SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




dissenting), and thereafter in continuing jurisdiction of this matter, DeRolph v. State
(1997), 78 Ohio St.3d 419, 423-424, 678 N.E.2d 886, 889-890 (Lundberg Stratton, J.,
concurring in part and dissenting in part). One of us has characterized the “bedrock
constitutional challenge” presented by this case as being quite simply the “horrible
funding inequities that persist between school districts in Ohio due to the state’s heavy
reliance on local property taxes in formulating the school foundation formula.”
DeRolph v. State (2000), 89 Ohio St.3d 1, 46, 728 N.E.2d 993, 1028 (“DeRolph II”)
(Pfeifer, J., concurring). One of us has expressed the belief that the court should
expressly declare education to be a fundamental right afforded to each Ohio child
pursuant to the Equal Protection Clause of the Ohio Constitution. DeRolph I, 78 Ohio
St.3d at 255-257, 677 N.E.2d at 776-777 (Douglas, J., concurring).
        {¶ 3} Despite our differences, however, we all agree upon the fundamental
importance of education to the children and citizens of this state. Educated, informed
citizens sustain the vitality of our democratic institutions. We differ little in support
of the desired ends so trenchantly recited by Justice Sweeney when he observed that
our forefathers, in drafting our state Constitution, “carried within them a deep-seated
belief that liberty and individual opportunity could be preserved only by educating
Ohio’s citizens,” DeRolph I, 78 Ohio St.3d at 197, 677 N.E.2d at 736, and by Justice
Resnick when she so incisively counseled that the goal of funding primary and
secondary public education should be to assure “a quality education for every single
child in Ohio regardless of where that child resides” so that every child may “enter a
structurally safe building, which is staffed with sufficient teachers, and contains
enough textbooks and equipment so that the child can develop self-esteem and
intellectual abilities,” DeRolph I, 78 Ohio St.3d at 260 and 261, 677 N.E.2d at 779
and 780 (Resnick, J., concurring). We agree regarding the goals of public education;
we have vigorously disagreed with respect to whether the legislature or the judiciary
has the ultimate authority to determine if the goals have been achieved.




                                           2
                                      January Term, 2001




         {¶ 4} The current plan for funding public primary and secondary education
adopted by the General Assembly and signed by the Governor1 is probably not the
plan that any one of us would have created were it our responsibility to do so. But
that is not our burden, and it is not the test we apply in this decision. None of us is
completely comfortable with the decision we announce in this opinion. But we
have responded to a duty that is intrinsic to our position as justices on the highest
court of the state. Drawing upon our own instincts and the wisdom of Thomas
Jefferson, we have reached the point where, while continuing to hold our previously
expressed opinions, the greater good requires us to recognize “the necessity of
sacrificing our opinions sometimes to the opinions of others for the sake of
harmony.” 16 Papers of Thomas Jefferson (Boyd Ed.1961) 598 (letter to Francis
Eppes, July 4, 1790).
         {¶ 5} A climate of legal, financial, and political uncertainty concerning
Ohio’s school-funding system has prevailed at least since this court accepted
jurisdiction of the case. We have concluded that no one is served by continued
uncertainty and fractious debate. In that spirit, we have created the consensus that
should terminate the role of this court in the dispute.
                                                  I
                                        Controlling Law
         {¶ 6} Pursuant to the doctrine of the law of the case, the “decision of a
reviewing court in a case remains the law of that case on the legal questions involved




1. Since DeRolph II, the General Assembly has enacted, e.g., 2000 Am.Sub.S.B. No 272, which
enhances the Classroom Facilities Assistance Program and otherwise addresses school facility
deficiencies; 2000 Am.Sub.S.B. No. 345, which addresses statutory provisions previously
characterized as imposing unfunded mandates, and establishes procedures to prevent fiscal problems
in school districts; 2000 Am.Sub.H.B. No. 94, the biennial budget bill, which prescribes formulas
for determining the amount of state funds to be distributed to the various school districts; and 2001
Am.Sub.S.B. No. 1, which establishes a new system of academic standards and testing to gauge the
success of Ohio students and schools.




                                                 3
                            SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




for all subsequent proceedings in the case at both the trial and reviewing levels.”
Nolan v. Nolan (1984), 11 Ohio St.3d 1, 3, 11 OBR 1, 2-3, 462 N.E.2d 410, 412.
       {¶ 7} On March 24, 1997 a majority of this court held, as syllabus law:
       “Ohio’s elementary and secondary public school financing system violates
Section 2, Article VI of the Ohio Constitution, which mandates a thorough and
efficient system of common schools throughout the state. The following specific
provisions are unconstitutional:
       “(a) R.C. 133.301, granting borrowing authority to school districts;
       “(b) R.C. 3313.483, 3313.487, 3313.488, 3313.489, and 3313.4810, the
emergency school assistance loan provisions;
       “(c) R.C. 3317.01, 3317.02, 3317.022, 3317.023, 3317.024, 3317.04,
3317.05, 3317.051 and 3317.052, the School Foundation Program;
       “(d) R.C. Chapter 3318, the Classroom Facilities Act, to the extent that it is
underfunded.” DeRolph v. State (1997), 78 Ohio St.3d 193, 677 N.E.2d 733,
syllabus.
       {¶ 8} The court admonished the General Assembly to create a new school-
funding system. Id. at 213, 677 N.E.2d at 747.
       {¶ 9} In April 1997, this court advised that the General Assembly may well
retain local property taxes as a funding source for Ohio schools, but that “property
taxes can no longer be the primary means of providing the finances for a thorough
and efficient system of schools.” DeRolph v. State (1997), 78 Ohio St.3d 419, 678
N.E.2d 886, 887. We also held that debt obligations incurred prior to DeRolph I
remained valid beyond the date of DeRolph I. Id. at 420, 678 N.E.2d at 887.
       {¶ 10} In September 1998, we made it clear that only the Thorough and
Efficient Clause of the Ohio Constitution, and not the Equal Protection Clause,
remained at issue in this case. DeRolph v. State (1998), 83 Ohio St.3d 1212, 699
N.E.2d 518. The court further held that the state would be required to “show by a




                                         4
                               January Term, 2001




preponderance of the evidence that the constitutional mandates have been satisfied”
in order to justify dismissal of the proceedings against them. Id.
       {¶ 11} A year ago, the majority established further law of this case. The
syllabus to DeRolph v. State (2000), 89 Ohio St.3d 1, 728 N.E.2d 993 (DeRolph II),
provides:
       “1. ‘[T]he sovereign people made it mandatory upon the General Assembly
to secure not merely a system of common schools,’ but rather a thorough and
efficient system of common schools. Miller v. Korns (1923), 107 Ohio St. 287, 297-
298, 140 N.E. 773, 776, approved and followed.
       “2. ‘The attainment of efficiency and thoroughness in that system’ of
common schools is ‘expressly made a purpose, not local, not municipal, but state-
wide.’ Id., approved and followed.
       “3. A thorough system means that each and every school district has enough
funds to operate. An efficient system means one in which each and every school
district in the state has an ample number of teachers, sound buildings that are in
compliance with state building and fire codes, and equipment sufficient for all
students to be afforded an educational opportunity.”
       {¶ 12} The court in DeRolph II retained continuing jurisdiction to provide
additional time for the state to further refine the school-funding system. We
acknowledged, however, that significant improvements in Ohio’s system of
common schools had been achieved in the time that elapsed between DeRolph I and
DeRolph II.
       {¶ 13} Most recently, we recognized that, in order to decide whether the
state’s funding system now is constitutional, we must examine Ohio’s statutory
school-funding system as designed by defendants as of June 15, 2001, and
determine “the likely effects that the legislation enacted in response to [DeRolph
II] will produce.” DeRolph v. State (2001), 91 Ohio St.3d 1274, 1276, 747 N.E.2d
823, 824.




                                         5
                              SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




        {¶ 14} It is the law contained in the syllabi to DeRolph I and DeRolph II and
the principles established by court entry in the case at bar by which we are required
to evaluate the constitutionality of the school-funding system now statutorily in
place. See Thackery v. Helfrich (1931), 123 Ohio St. 334, 336, 175 N.E. 449, 450
(this court “announces the law only through the syllabi of cases and through per
curiam opinions”); S.Ct.R.Rep.Op. 1(B) (“The syllabus of a Supreme Court opinion
states the controlling point or points of law decided in and necessarily arising from the
facts of the specific case before the Court for adjudication”).
                                           II
Adequacy of Funding; Assurance of “Ample Number of Teachers, Sound Buildings
        in Compliance with State Building and Fire Codes, and Equipment
        Sufficient for All Students to be Afforded an Educational Opportunity”
        (DeRolph II, Paragraph Three of the Syllabus)
                                           A
                     Adequacy of Funding—Base Cost Formula
        {¶ 15} As defined in DeRolph II, a “thorough system means that each and
every school district has enough funds to operate.” 89 Ohio St.3d 1, 728 N.E.2d
993, paragraph three of the syllabus. To this end, the General Assembly has been
charged with determining the amount of funding that is adequate to establish a
“constitutionally required foundation of basic educational opportunity.” Id. at 47,
728 N.E.2d at 1029 (Pfeifer, J., concurring). Unlike the formula determined to be
problematic by this court in DeRolph II, the General Assembly has offered a new
funding formula to arrive at the base cost of providing for an adequate education.
        {¶ 16} Under 2001 H.B. No. 94, the General Assembly recalculated the cost
of providing an adequate education to be $4,814 per student in fiscal year 2002.
R.C. 3317.012(A). This figure is increased by 2.8 percent per year to account for
rising costs, resulting in a base cost per student of $5,527 in fiscal year 2007. R.C.
3317.012(A)(1). A most significant aspect of H.B. 94 is that the base cost amount




                                           6
                                January Term, 2001




of $4,814 is funded in the full amount immediately without a phase-in period.
Removal of the phase-in period addresses a key concern of DeRolph II that the state
was “funding below the level that the General Assembly deemed to be the base
amount for an adequate education,” 89 Ohio St.3d at 18-19, 728 N.E.2d at 1007,
and the statement that the “phase-in aspect of the basic aid amount should be
reconsidered.” Id. at 37, 728 N.E.2d at 1021.
       {¶ 17} The formula adopted by the General Assembly has changed in other
significant ways. To determine the base cost of an adequate education, the new
formula uses the unweighted average cost per student of educating students enrolled
in selected districts. Under the new law, this selection began with one hundred
seventy school districts that, in fiscal year 1999, met at least twenty of twenty-seven
performance standards established by H.B. 94. R.C. 3317.012(B)(1)(a) through
(aa). Districts in the top and bottom five percent of income and property wealth
bases are deleted to adjust for anomalies within those districts, leaving one hundred
twenty-seven model districts.
       {¶ 18} The H.B. 94 methodology for determining state aid considers the
following factors: base cost, the district’s cost of doing business, the districts’
average daily membership (“ADM”), property valuation, and the charge-off rate of
twenty-three mills ($0.023) per dollar of valuation. The formula is ADM x base
cost x cost-of-doing-business factor – 0.23 x property valuation = state aid to a
school district for basic education costs. R.C. 3317.022.
       {¶ 19} H.B. 94 adopts a charge-off rate of twenty-three mills per dollar of
valuation. R.C. 3317.022. Additionally, H.B. 94 continues to provide a charge-off
supplement, termed “gap aid,” to account for districts that are not able to fund their
local share of the base cost amount. H.B. 94 applies gap aid not only to base cost,
special education costs, and vocational education costs, but also to transportation
costs. R.C. 3317.0216(C)(1). H.B. 94 also eliminates the phase-in of state funding
increases. Greater gap aid addresses the problem of “phantom revenue” by assuring




                                          7
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




that the state will contribute more funding to districts where the tax base does not
increase at the same rate as the increase in the base cost amount.
       {¶ 20} As an additional measure to ensure that no district is unable to fund
programs because of its small local tax base, the General Assembly has enacted
legislation that requires districts to pay no more than an additional three mills of
local tax revenue to provide for their share of special education, vocational
education, and transportation. R.C. 3317.022(F). H.B. 94 restructures the manner
in which the state contributes to such programs.
       {¶ 21} The state has also reassessed the manner in which it approaches
transportation costs. Under H.B. 94, the state’s share of transportation costs is the
greater of sixty percent or the same percentage that the state pays for the district’s
base cost. R.C. 3317.022(B)(2), (D)(3). According to the state’s experts, this
greater level of funding will benefit rural, property-poor districts that have greater
transportation needs.
       {¶ 22} H.B. 94 further adds six weights to determine the method by which
special education is funded. R.C. 3317.013(A) through (F). In part as a result of
the new weights, the state projects that state special education funding will increase
18.6 percent from fiscal year 2001 to fiscal year 2003. The percentage of the state’s
share increases automatically once a district’s cost of serving a special education
student exceeds $30,000 in category six of the special education categories and
$25,000 for categories two through five. R.C. 3317.022(C)(3). The state funds one
hundred percent of half the costs above the applicable threshold, plus the calculated
state share percentage of the other half. R.C. 3317.022(C)(3)(a)(i) and (ii).




                                          8
                                 January Term, 2001




                                           B
                                      Parity Aid
        {¶ 23} In addition to modifying the base cost formula, the General
Assembly has also enacted another form of aid termed “parity aid” by the state.
Parity aid addresses disparities between wealthier districts and poorer districts and
provides additional funds to the latter. As designed by the General Assembly,
parity aid is intended to give low-wealth districts the opportunity to spend funds on
discretionary items in the same manner as wealthier districts.            The General
Assembly determined that in fiscal year 2001, school districts in the seventieth to
ninetieth percentile in valuation per pupil collected an average of 9.5 mills beyond
the millage necessary to fund their calculated local share of the base cost amount,
special education, vocational education, and transportation funding.                R.C.
3317.0217(C)(2). With parity aid, eligible districts will receive funding to make
up the difference between what they can raise on 9.5 mills and what the district at
the eightieth percentile in income-adjusted wealth can raise ($1,300).              R.C.
3317.0217(C). The amount of parity aid distributed, therefore, will vary on a
district-by-district basis depending upon how far below the eightieth percentile a
district falls. Defendants estimate that parity aid will provide an additional $100
million to eighty percent of school districts in fiscal year 2002 and an additional
$500 million per year when the program is fully phased in by fiscal year 2006.
        {¶ 24} Parity aid is designed to address disparities in tax bases even after
ensuring full funding of the base cost, special and vocational education, and
transportation costs. The ability to receive parity aid, however, is not dependent
upon local effort. If a district is unable or unwilling to generate additional funding,
it will still receive parity aid if it falls below the eightieth percentile. For example,
the state estimates that New Lexington City School District in Perry County would
receive an additional $774 per student this year if parity aid were fully phased in,
for a total $1.4 million per year, and the Cleveland City School District would




                                           9
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




receive an additional $601 per student, for a total of $43,873,307 per year. All of
the money provided under the parity aid program is paid above the base cost amount
and equalizes disparities in the amount needed to address the adequacy concerns of
DeRolph II.
        {¶ 25} Additionally, H.B. 94 incorporates a “stabilizing” function to ensure
that the “state share percentage of base cost and parity aid funding” (defined in R.C.
3317.012[D][5]) does not vary by more than 2.5 percent between the current year
and the last year in which a calculated base cost amount took effect, i.e., the “update
years” (defined in R.C. 3317.012[D][1]). If the General Assembly estimates that
the state share percentage will vary by more than 2.5 percent from the preceding
update year, it must bring the state share back within the allowable variance by any
means it determines to be necessary. R.C. 3317.012(D)(4).
        {¶ 26} Parity aid and gap aid are significant, expansive aspects of the new
legislation that reflect defendants’ genuine efforts in complying with the rulings of
this court.
                                          C
                                      Facilities
        {¶ 27} This court in DeRolph II held that an efficient system of common
schools is one in which school districts throughout the state have “sound buildings
that are in compliance with state building and fire codes.” Id., 89 Ohio St.3d 1, 728
N.E.2d 993, paragraph three of the syllabus. Plaintiffs argue that many deficient
school buildings are still in use today. But in deciding whether the school-funding
system created in the legislation under review is constitutional, we must determine
only whether, when fully implemented, the legislation enacted in response to
DeRolph II will likely have the effect of bringing these facilities into compliance
within a reasonable time. When determining what is a reasonable time, we must
realize that construction and renovation are necessarily lengthy and complex
processes and are not amenable to a one-year or even a five-year deadline.




                                          10
                                January Term, 2001




        {¶ 28} There is a well-documented need for many of Ohio’s school
buildings to be renovated, repaired, or replaced, or for completely new facilities to
be constructed, in order to meet the standards established by DeRolph II.
Construction of this magnitude will necessarily be complex and time-consuming.
        {¶ 29} The state of Ohio has dedicated a large amount of its budget to
constructing and repairing school facilities. Since 1998, the General Assembly has
allocated nearly $2.7 billion to this effort. The Ohio School Facilities Commission
directs this funding to local school districts, and as of May 2001 was distributing
an average $1.5 million dollars daily—a number that continues to grow.
Additionally, the Facilities Commission provides management oversight and
technical assistance to the local school districts for construction and renovation.
Building Our Future, Ohio School Facilities Commission FY 2000 Annual Report,
at 3.
        {¶ 30} The state has devised multiple interlocking programs that address
different aspects of the school facilities problem. For example:
        ● Since 1997, the Classroom Facilities Assistance Program has funded
replacement and renovation projects in seventy-three school districts, expending
over $1.8 billion in state funding. Building Our Future, at 8.
        ●   The Exceptional Needs Program provides immediate assistance to
districts of below average wealth with exceptional needs for classroom facilities.
R.C. 3318.37.
        ● The Expedited Local Partnership Program allows school districts to fund
repair or construction through local monies before their state funding becomes
available through the Classroom Facilities Assistance Program. R.C. 3318.36.
Once funds from the program become available, the school district receives credit
for their required local contribution. Eligibility for the program was recently
expanded by amendment of R.C. 3318.36 by 2000 Am.Sub.S.B. No. 272.




                                         11
                               SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




       ●    The “Big 8” and Accelerated Urban School Building Assistance
Programs target urban school districts for major renovations and repairs. 1997
Am.Sub.S.B. No. 102, Section 7, 147 Ohio Laws, Part IV, 7416; R.C. 3318.38,
enacted by 2000 Am.Sub.S.B. No. 272; Building Our Future, at 10. The Big 8
Program is authorized to provide up to $120 million in matching funds, and
includes the larger districts in the state, such as the Akron, Toledo, Dayton,
Cincinnati, Columbus, and Cleveland city schools. Building Our Future, at 10. As
of the end of calendar year 2000, these districts had spent over fifty percent of the
funds available to them. Id.
       ● The Extreme Environmental Contamination Program provides assistance
for any classroom facility that needs to be replaced or relocated due to extreme
environmental contamination. H.B. No. 94, Section 186.
       ● The School Building Emergency Assistance Program provides assistance
to all school districts to reconstruct, repair, or renovate classroom facilities
damaged by an act of God. R.C. 3318.351(A)(2).
       {¶ 31} Significant progress has been made to date. The Facilities Commission
has provided facilities funding to three hundred sixty-four school districts. OSFC: All
District Summary, Ohio School Facilities Commission.           As of May 2001, the
commission was administering projects that will provide for over three hundred
additional buildings, and will complete fifty full building fixes by the end of 2001.
       {¶ 32} In addition, S.B. 272 requires the state to make a facilities assessment
within two years of a request by the school district. R.C. 3318.022. Complete facilities
assessments will have been performed on four hundred and fifty districts by the end
of 2001. These facilities assessments are crucial to determining what needs remain to
be addressed in terms of repair and construction.
       {¶ 33} Plaintiffs argue that the state is not doing enough to remedy the
facilities problem. First, plaintiffs argue that the state’s timetable for fixing these
problems is too slow. As we have observed above, however, to pass constitutional




                                          12
                                    January Term, 2001




muster the state must have in place legislation that will be likely to bring school
facilities into compliance within a reasonable time.
        {¶ 34} Plaintiffs also argue that future funding for school facilities remains
uncertain. We acknowledge that there is no legislation currently in place that
guarantees funding for the programs outlined beyond the current biennium. However,
this concern is inherent in a democracy where public policy is never stagnant, and in
a state that operates on a biennial budget. As was noted in DeRolph II, the duration
of any legislative appropriation is “limited by the prohibition of Section 22, Article II
of the Ohio Constitution, which prohibits the General Assembly from appropriating
for more than a two-year period.” DeRolph II, 89 Ohio St.3d at 24, 728 N.E.2d at
1011. Were it necessary to guarantee funding in the future, this court would be
required to retain jurisdiction in this cause in perpetuity.
        {¶ 35} Plaintiffs argue that in the current system, local school districts are
required to contribute to financing of the repair, renovation, and construction of
school buildings, and that this necessarily violates the strictures set down in
DeRolph II. However, nothing in the Ohio Constitution or any of the controlling
law of this case precludes the state from insisting on joint state-local support of
primary and secondary schools.
        {¶ 36} Plaintiffs also argue that the state has not performed a comprehensive
survey to determine whether school buildings are in compliance with building and fire
codes. However, as discussed earlier, S.B. 272 requires the state to make a complete
assessment within two years upon receiving a request from a local school district.
R.C. 3318.022. This method of assessing the schools is reasonable, given the
practicalities of such a project.
        {¶ 37} The     Ohio     School    Facilities    Commission     has   developed
comprehensive guidelines for the design and construction of commission-funded
buildings. Building Our Future, Ohio School Facilities Commission FY 2000
Annual Report, at 7. Plaintiffs maintain that these guidelines require schools to




                                            13
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




accept buildings that are inadequate for educational needs. Specifically, plaintiffs
assert that the guidelines provide for inadequate numbers of rooms if the twenty-
five-to-one student-teacher ratio is to be maintained. Inadequacies in School
Facilities: A Review of the State’s Program, Ohio Coalition for Equity & Adequacy
of School Funding, at 2. They note that the twenty-five-to-one ratio dictates the
size of the room, and that school districts that wish to have a lower student-teacher
ratio will find themselves forced to add additional rooms at their own expense.
       {¶ 38} The state’s funding initiative for school districts with a substantial
portion of families living below the poverty line, Disadvantaged Pupil Impact Aid
(“DPIA”), has reduction in classroom size as one of its primary goals. The class-
size-reduction portion of DPIA requires districts to focus their efforts on reducing
the student-teacher ratio in kindergarten through third grades. The target student-
teacher ratio for individual districts is calculated through use of a complicated index
based on the concentration of students in the district living below the poverty line.
R.C. 3317.029(E). Options available to the school districts are not limited to
reducing the number of students in a classroom taught by a single teacher but
include the use of teacher’s aides, team teaching, and extending the length of the
school day or school year. R.C. 3317.029(F)(3).
       {¶ 39} The Legislative Office of Education reported in October 2000 that
the average number of students in kindergarten through third grade in five selected
districts receiving DPIA varied from eighteen to twenty-four students. Barriers to
achieving a reduced student-teacher ratio do exist, including the uncertainty of
sustained funding of additional teachers and lack of classroom space. These are
serious concerns.     However, the commission conducts a ten-year projected
enrollment analysis prior to beginning design work for a district, and designs
facilities based on the highest enrollment figure in that ten-year period, or
enrollment in the third year if enrollment is declining. If something occurs later to
change this figure, the commission works with the district to make any necessary




                                          14
                                January Term, 2001




adjustments. Currently, more than half of those districts reporting a need for more
space are working with the Ohio School Facilities Commission to resolve the
problem. On balance, we find that the problem of student-teacher ratio as it relates
to facilities can be improved through state and local collaboration within the
existing legislative framework, and we do not find that the admittedly imperfect
current situation is grounds for striking down the legislative framework as
unconstitutional. We decline to find that the guidelines as promulgated by the Ohio
School Facilities Commission result in inadequate buildings.
                                          D
                 Adequacy of Funding for Teachers and Supplies
       {¶ 40} The majority in DeRolph I concluded that the record contained
exhaustive evidence that “the appellant school districts were starved for funds,
lacked teachers, buildings, and equipment, and had inferior educational programs,
and that their pupils were being deprived of educational opportunity.” DeRolph I,
78 Ohio St.3d at 205, 677 N.E.2d at 742. That record demonstrated that some of
the poorest school districts in the state at that time were forced to ration even basic
supplies: “paper, chalk, art supplies, paper clips, and even toilet paper.” Id. at 208,
677 N.E.2d at 744. The evidence revealed instances of schools where textbooks
were not available to every student, id. at 259, 677 N.E.2d at 778, and classes were
held under leaking roofs and in former coal bins, id. at 241, 255, 677 N.E.2d at
766, 755 (Douglas, J., concurring).
       {¶ 41} The record before us today is very different. The plaintiffs now
assert that “educational deprivation” exists because, e.g., within the one hundred
twenty-seven districts used to calculate the base amounts, one district has the “least
number of teachers allowable to operate a district,” not all high schools offer
advanced placement classes, some elementary schools lack space for science labs,
and art and music classes in some districts must share the same room. These




                                          15
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




complaints simply do not equate to deprivation of an opportunity to receive a basic
education.
       {¶ 42} The second paragraph of the syllabus to DeRolph II, 89 Ohio St.3d
1, 728 N.E.2d 993, establishes the legal proposition that efficiency and
thoroughness in Ohio’s system of common schools is a statewide goal rather than
a local one. In April 2000, Governor Taft created the Governor’s Commission for
Student Success, whose members included parents, educators, community leaders,
and legislators. The commission conducted sixteen focus group discussions, polled
one thousand Ohioans, and met with twenty-eight constituent groups to better
understand Ohioans’ thoughts and concerns about public education. In December
2000, the commission issued its report, entitled “Expecting More:             Higher
Achievement for Ohio’s Students and Schools.” The report contained thirty-one
recommendations to create a statewide system of academic performance standards,
student and school assessments, and school accountability. In January 2001,
legislation incorporating recommendations from the report was introduced as
Senate Bill No. 1. The bill was enacted and signed into law on June 12, 2001.
       {¶ 43} In adopting and signing this legislation, the General Assembly and
the Governor have adopted public policies consistent with the commission’s view
that, while “the state has a clear and important role in establishing statewide
academic standards, * * * local flexibility in the design and implementation of
instructional programs and other services to help children learn” should be retained.
In the words of the commission’s report, it “is appropriate for the state to say what
should be learned in key subjects; it is much less appropriate for the state to
determine how local schools should teach students to meet these standards.”
(Emphasis sic.)
       {¶ 44} In its report, the commission stated that it “subscribes to a
philosophy that keeps the state’s interest as narrow as possible and gives flexibility
to local school boards, administrators and teachers.       But, while flexible, the




                                         16
                                  January Term, 2001




Commission recommendations are oriented toward action: Where students are in
danger of falling behind or not meeting key state academic standards, the
Commission expects local schools to act aggressively. In some cases, we actually
require action.    The state will provide help—additional resources, technical
assistance, training and examples of strategies that work—but local educators must
be the ones who provide the necessary instruction to make sure students reach the
standards.”
         {¶ 45} Accordingly, the commission recommended that “schools be
expected to provide intensive instruction and intervention services to students
whose diagnostic assessments show they are unlikely to reach the academic
standards. The nature of these services should be determined locally but could
include summer school, extended time in school, tutoring assistance or smaller class
size.”
         {¶ 46} This legislative plan just enacted reflects a public policy decision
that local school districts and boards of education ultimately are responsible for
managing and allocating their financial resources so as not only to achieve the
constitutionally mandated, statewide goal of providing all students a basic
educational opportunity, but to achieve a second goal as well—the goal of helping
individual students take advantage of that opportunity and thereby receive the
lifelong benefits of education.
         {¶ 47} The current statutory system contemplates that the districts of the
state will themselves determine, at least initially, on a district-by-district basis, how
to allocate their resources to provide enough teachers and sufficient equipment to
achieve satisfactory performance results as measured by school district and student
assessments. Failure to achieve satisfactory educational results will, however,
trigger state review and assistance.       The commission has acknowledged that
districts found to be falling short may need additional funding from the state in
order to ensure that their schools are able to improve.




                                           17
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




       {¶ 48} Indeed, the evidence before us demonstrates that Ohio schools are
already improving. In school evaluations issued in 2001 pursuant to R.C. 3302.03,
thirty-six districts, including three urban districts, improved their designation from
“academic emergency” to “academic watch.” The number of school districts in
“academic emergency” declined from sixty-nine to thirty-five, a reduction of nearly
fifty percent. A fifteen percent increase was realized in the number of school
districts rising to the status of “continuous improvement” from lower designations.
For the first time, all Ohio schools met state standards for science in grades nine,
ten, and twelve.
       {¶ 49} Assessments show improvement at the student level as well. In
comparing proficiency test results from 2001 to those from 2000, preliminary
findings show that sixty percent compared to forty-nine percent of fourth graders
passed the mathematics test, fifty-six percent compared to forty-eight percent
passed the science test, and sixty-one percent compared to fifty-five percent of sixth
graders passed the mathematics and science tests. While not all categories of test
results show such striking improvements, the overall trend in the 2001 proficiency
test results is one of improving performance.
       {¶ 50} The new statutory framework has made positive changes in the base
cost amount. The plan also restructures gap aid and introduces parity aid, as
described above, to assist poor districts. The plan is designed to ensure that an
adequate number of teachers and supplies will exist in every district, thereby
affording every child an opportunity to receive a basic education.
                                          III
                   Avoidance of Primary Reliance on Property Tax
       {¶ 51} In DeRolph I, this court’s primary concern with the state’s funding
system was that it relied too heavily on local property taxes to fund a statewide
system. 78 Ohio St.3d at 212, 677 N.E.2d at 747. The problem this creates, as
articulated in DeRolph II, is that a system overly reliant on local property taxes will




                                          18
                                January Term, 2001




result in disparities between districts because the same tax effort in two different
districts will produce different results. 89 Ohio St.3d at 26, 728 N.E.2d at 1013. In
defining overreliance, we stated that local taxes need not be totally abandoned,
because equality is not constitutionally mandated. DeRolph I, 78 Ohio St.3d at 211,
677 N.E.2d at 746. Rather than completely rejecting property taxes, the majority
stated that “property taxes can no longer be the primary means of providing the
finances for a thorough and efficient system of schools.” (Emphasis added.) 78
Ohio St.3d at 419, 678 N.E.2d at 887. Thus, some use of local property taxes is
constitutionally permissible.
       {¶ 52} Therefore, disparity caused by a school-funding system that rests on
the dual foundations of state support and local property tax revenues is
unconstitutional only if the disparity is so dramatic that children in the poorest of
our school districts are deprived of a basic educational opportunity, and a thorough
and efficient distribution of funds need only ensure that each Ohio school district
is financially able to offer an adequate education.
       {¶ 53} In general, property taxes are less sensitive to economic cycles than
are taxes based on income or sales. Property values tend to remain stable over time,
whereas income and spending are affected by movements in the economy. Property
taxes, therefore, give school districts a stable and reliable source of local revenue
through both good and bad economic times. The problems that arise from property
taxes, however, are the continuing need for school districts to raise revenue through
voted local levies that are subject to the limitations of R.C. 319.301 and the unequal
distribution of property wealth throughout the state. Districts that have more
property wealth generate more local revenue than do poorer districts. Overreliance
on property taxes, therefore, has led to disparate educational opportunities in these
property poor districts. H.B. 94, however, has altered the funding structure to
address the concerns of this court through three major changes.




                                         19
                              SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




        {¶ 54} The first method by which the General Assembly has reduced the
reliance on local property taxes is by altering the charge-off supplement system,
known as gap aid. As previously described, gap aid supplements funding in
districts that cannot produce their local share of the base cost.
        {¶ 55} Second, H.B. 94 limits any district’s local share of special education,
vocational education, and transportation to three mills. R.C. 3317.022(F). Limiting
the local share of these costs to three mills reduces the amount of local revenue a
district must generate. As a consequence, and assuming that the district raises more
than three mills, the limiting function raises the amount of funds available to poorer
districts for discretionary spending that the district would not have if forced to pay
more for its share of these programs. This, in turn, reduces the concern of a district
in providing merely an adequate education and allows it to focus its spending efforts
on providing more than just the basics.
        {¶ 56} Third, the parity aid program contributes additional funds to poorer
districts. It gives those districts the spending power of wealthier districts without
requiring a district to levy any additional funds at the local level.
        {¶ 57} Additionally, local contributions for construction of new school
facilities are no longer contingent upon local property taxes. S.B. 272 authorizes
several different options for local funding sources other than a local property tax.
For example, to pay their local share required by R.C. 3318.05, districts may now
apply the proceeds of an existing tax levy for general ongoing improvements or a
school district income tax. R.C. 3318.052. Districts may also apply locally donated
contributions toward their portion of the basic project cost. R.C. 3318.084. Two
or more districts may also enter into an agreement with the Treasurer of State to
pool bonds to finance their respective projects with the facilities commission. R.C.
3318.085. Finally, districts may credit as part of their local share any bonds issued
for classroom facilities within eighteen months before being notified that they are
eligible for state assistance, so long as the facilities supported by the bond measure




                                          20
                                 January Term, 2001




meet design specifications of the facilities commission. R.C. 3318.01(L); 3318.03;
3318.033; 3318.05; 3318.08.
        {¶ 58} As we recognized in DeRolph I, no system of school funding could
address every inequality associated with reliance on local property taxes as a basis
for school funding. 78 Ohio St.3d at 211, 677 N.E.2d at 746. While this court
found in DeRolph II that the system then in place did not meet this court’s prior
mandate, we recognize that the General Assembly has made significant changes to
the prior structure in order to reduce reliance on local property taxes. Through
changes in gap aid, millage caps, changes in base cost formulation, and the parity
aid program, for example, the current system established by H.B. 94, when fully
implemented in accordance with this opinion, will reduce reliance on local property
taxes to a constitutionally acceptable level by providing substantially more state aid
to districts less able to generate local revenue.
                                          IV
                                Conclusion and Order
        {¶ 59} We have thoroughly reviewed the plan now in place and are
convinced that the defendants are committed to improving primary and secondary
education. That commitment has operated, and can be expected to further operate,
to ameliorate the undesirable educational conditions shown in DeRolph I.
        {¶ 60} In their amicus curiae briefs, both Governor Bob Taft and the current
majority leadership of the General Assembly have reaffirmed their commitment to
staying the course of progress we have seen in the period between DeRolph I and
today. We believe that the leaders of this General Assembly, Governor Taft, and
Superintendent Zelman intend to fully implement the school-funding plan for
which they have so earnestly argued.
        {¶ 61} Despite the extensive efforts of the defendants to produce a plan that
meets the requirements announced by this court, changes to the formula are
required to make the new plan constitutional:




                                          21
                               SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




        {¶ 62} Base Cost Formula: H.B. 94 recalculates the cost of providing an
adequate education to be $4,814 per student in fiscal year 2002. The base cost formula
uses one hundred twenty-seven model school districts as a basis for determining base
cost support. That number of school districts is achieved by screening out districts in
the top and bottom five percent of all Ohio districts based on income and property
wealth from the state’s pool of the one hundred seventy top-performing districts. Also
included within this number are several districts that did not meet twenty of twenty-
seven performance standards, but were included regardless because of a rounding
procedure included within H.B. 94. R.C. 3317.012(B)(1), last paragraph. As the
plaintiffs note, rounding and wealth screens include districts that should not be
considered in the base cost formula and exclude districts that should be considered.
Plaintiffs’ arguments and our review of the record convince us that the formula must
be modified to include the top five percent districts and the lower five percent districts,
and by considering only those districts that actually meet twenty of twenty-seven
performance standards without rounding. We make no determination regarding the
time in which the state must calculate and implement actual changes in the amount of
funds distributed to each district pursuant to today’s order, but the new calculations
must be applied retroactive to July 1, 2001, and to the subsequent years designated in
R.C. 3317.012. Moreover, in determining future biennial budgets through fiscal year
2007, the rate of millage charged off as the local share of base cost funding under
divisions (A)(1) and (2) of R.C. 3317.022 may not be changed from twenty-three
mills, irrespective of the language of R.C. 3317.012(D)(4) suggesting such a
methodology.
        {¶ 63} The H.B. 94 model calculates its base cost amount using spending
data for FY96, adjusted for inflation, or actual FY99 expenditure data, whichever
is lower. R.C. 3317.012(B), last paragraph. The state uses the lower of the two
figures to compensate for what it terms an “echo effect,” or to adjust for districts
that spent more than what was actually needed at the base level, due to line-item




                                            22
                                 January Term, 2001




expenditures, other state funding outside of the foundation formula, and local
enhancement revenues. The model districts subject to lowering of their base cost
are those that the state determined to be model districts in 1996. As the plaintiffs’
experts observed, there has been insufficient evidence presented by the state to
justify lowering the base cost amount to adjust for this supposed echo effect. ETPI
Report, at 6. Accordingly, we are persuaded by the plaintiffs that choosing the
lower of FY96 expenditures or FY99 actual expenditures is unsupported by the
evidence and should not be used to lower the base cost amount figure.
       {¶ 64} Parity Aid: The parity aid program is a salutary attempt to provide
poorer districts with funds similar to those available to wealthier districts that are
used to substantially enhance the educational experience of each student. The plan
as adopted would fully fund the parity aid program by fiscal year 2006. We have
concluded that the parity aid program must be fully funded no later than the
beginning of fiscal year 2004.
       {¶ 65} To summarize, we observe that the state has chosen to retain a
foundation program of funding primary and secondary public education. We find
that, having so elected, it must, in order to meet the requirements of DeRolph I and
DeRolph II, formulate the base cost of providing an adequate education by using
all school districts meeting twenty of twenty-seven performance standards as set
forth by the General Assembly in R.C. 3317.012(B)(1)(a) through (aa), without
adjustments to exclude districts based on wealth screens, without rounding
adjustments to include additional lower-spending districts, and without use of the
“echo effect” adjustment, beginning effective July 1, 2001. In addition, the parity
aid program established by the General Assembly must be fully funded no later
than July 1, 2003.
       {¶ 66} With full implementation of these modifications to the funding plan
adopted by the General Assembly the plan will meet the test for constitutionality
created in DeRolph I and DeRolph II. While the changes will have a fiscal impact,




                                         23
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




they will not require structural changes to the school foundation program set forth
in R.C. Chapter 3317.
       {¶ 67} One final observation is in order. Historically, the construction and
maintenance of school facilities have been considered the responsibility of local
school districts. By 1989, the General Assembly had begun addressing school
facilities needs and committing funds to construction and repair of school buildings.
We have described previously the substantial commitment of the state to the
availability of adequate school buildings for every student enrolled in public
education. However, the unmet needs are enormous and the time in which it is
feasible to meet them is lengthy. We urge the General Assembly to review and
consider alternative means of funding school buildings and related facilities.
       {¶ 68} The state is hereby ordered to implement the changes described
above. Because we have no reason to doubt defendants’ good faith, we have
concluded that there is no reason to retain jurisdiction of the matter before us. If
the order receives less than full compliance, interested parties have remedies
available to them.
                                                                        So ordered.
       DOUGLAS, PFEIFER and LUNDBERG STRATTON, JJ., concur.
       DOUGLAS and PFEIFER, JJ., separately concur.
       PFEIFER, J., separately concurs.
       LUNDBERG STRATTON, J., separately concurs.
       RESNICK, J., separately dissents.
       RESNICK and F.E. SWEENEY, JJ., separately dissent.
       COOK, J., separately dissents.
                              __________________
       DOUGLAS, J., concurring.
       {¶ 69} As this case involves principles of great importance and may have
an enduring influence on the institutions of our state, I embrace the high privilege




                                           24
                                 January Term, 2001




of stating distinctly my opinion on several of the difficult matters before us. Today
a new majority decides a case to be known as DeRolph III. In creating this new
majority, each member of this majority takes a position that substantially deviates
from a previously held determination on the issues before us. Our coming to the
conclusion we now reach does not mean that any one or all of us hold less dear
those principles that we have expressed before. Because of the inevitable criticism
of each of us individually and all of us collectively that is sure to follow, I take the
time to write separately to memorialize a few thoughts.
                                        History
        {¶ 70} On March 24, 1997, this court decided DeRolph v. State (1997), 78
Ohio St.3d 193, 677 N.E.2d 733 (“DeRolph I”). In DeRolph I, we held that certain
provisions of Ohio’s elementary and secondary school-financing system then in
effect violated Section 2, Article VI of the Ohio Constitution, which mandates a
thorough and efficient system of common schools throughout the state. Id. at
syllabus.
        {¶ 71} On May 11, 2000, the court decided DeRolph v. State (2000), 89
Ohio St.3d 1, 728 N.E.2d 993 (“DeRolph II”). In DeRolph II, we held that the
state’s method of funding elementary and secondary schools drafted in response to
our decision in DeRolph I fell short of providing for a thorough and efficient system
of public schools throughout this state. Id. at 35-36, 728 N.E.2d at 1020. Further,
we retained continuing jurisdiction over DeRolph II in order to provide the state
additional time in which to comply with the constitutional requirements set forth in
Section 2, Article VI. Id. at 38, 728 N.E.2d at 1022.
        {¶ 72} Now before us is DeRolph III. The same issue under consideration
in DeRolph I and II is again before this court. That issue is whether the current
method of funding primary and secondary education in Ohio complies with Section
2, Article VI of the Ohio Constitution by providing a thorough and efficient system
of common schools throughout the state. The Chief Justice has impressively set




                                          25
                               SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




forth the contents and structure of the legislation now before us. I concur in the
well-reasoned decision of the majority that with the additional initiatives therein
ordered, the state will have in place a statutory school-funding framework that
withstands scrutiny under the Thorough and Efficient Clause of the Ohio
Constitution as previously interpreted by this court in DeRolph II. I write further
for the purpose of detailing several of the numerous issues that I and the other
members of the court have examined throughout this litigation.
                                 Separation of Powers
        {¶ 73} Throughout the DeRolph litigation, we, as a court and individually,
have been presented with an abundance of concerns. One of the primary concerns has
been the doctrine of separation of powers. “Separation of powers” is a misnomer.
There is no explicit declaration concerning separation of powers in either the federal
Constitution or our state Constitution. Both Constitutions separate government into
three branches while fusing certain functions and powers of those bodies. For
instance, a president’s or governor’s veto protects the executive branch against
legislative encroachments. The power of appointment protects the executive branch
from judicial assault, and executive officers and administrative bodies exercise
functions that belong to other departments. In addition, state and federal courts have
the power to pass on the constitutionality of legislation, and federal judges are
protected by life tenure. Further, although the courts do not legislate in the strict sense
of the word, their decisions may be regarded from a realistic point of view as a form
of lawmaking. Finally, the legislative branch controls the purse upon which the
executive and judicial departments depend.           Mason & Stephenson, American
Constitutional Law: Introductory Essays and Selected Cases (8 Ed.1987) 76.
        {¶ 74} The doctrine of separation of powers defines the very character of
this country’s political system of governance. Wood, The Creation of the American
Republic 1776-1787 (1998 Ed.) 151. As James Madison explained in Federalist
Paper No. 47, the sharing of powers through a system of checks and balances




                                            26
                                January Term, 2001




complemented the principle of separation of powers by acting as an additional
restraint on government. This blending of powers not only limits government itself,
it also provides mechanisms by which each branch can defend its place in our
constitutional system.    The Federalist Papers No. 47 (Madison 1788) (Wills
Ed.1982), at 243-246. See, also, Mason & Stephenson, American Constitutional
Law, supra, at 76. Thus, the doctrine is viewed as serving a dual purpose. On one
hand, it is said that “[t]he doctrine of the separation of powers was adopted by the
convention of 1787 not to promote efficiency but to preclude the exercise of
arbitrary power.” Myers v. United States (1926), 272 U.S. 52, 293, 47 S.Ct. 21, 85,
71 L.Ed. 160, 242 (Brandeis, J., dissenting). On the other hand, the principle is
construed as a facilitator of responsible governance. “While the Constitution
diffuses power the better to secure liberty, it also contemplates that practice will
integrate the dispersed powers into a workable government.” Youngstown Sheet &
Tube Co. v. Sawyer (1952), 343 U.S. 579, 635, 72 S.Ct. 863, 870, 96 L.Ed. 1153,
1199 (Jackson, J., concurring). See, also, Entin, Separation of Powers, The Political
Branches, and the Limits of Judicial Review (1990), 51 Ohio St.L.J. 175. Thus, it
is clear that the concept of the separation of powers is a political doctrine rather
than a technical rule of law.
    Meaning of the Separation-of-Powers Doctrine to the DeRolph Litigation
       {¶ 75} The doctrine of separation of powers has played a paramount role
throughout our history in ensuring that interbranch conflict never reaches a
constitutional crisis. Conflicts between the three branches of government are
inherent in our political system. Interbranch conflicts are “natural byproducts of
the separation of powers principle.” Hatch, Avoidance of Constitutional Conflicts
(1987), 48 U.Pitt.L.Rev. 1025, 1027-1028. Thus, it is inevitable that conflicts will
arise. The framers of the federal Constitution foresaw friction between the branches
of government and sanctioned those conflicts as “the means of keeping each other




                                         27
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




in their proper places.” The Federalist Papers No. 51 (Madison 1788) (Wills
Ed.1982), at 261.
       {¶ 76} From a practical standpoint, the judicial branch is not the only branch
of government that engages in constitutional interpretation. In this respect, the
DeRolph litigation was sure to spawn conflict between the branches of government.
“In the performance of assigned constitutional duties each branch of the
Government must initially interpret the Constitution, and the interpretation of its
powers by any branch is due great respect from the others.” United States v. Nixon
(1974), 418 U.S. 683, 703, 94 S.Ct. 3090, 3105, 41 L.Ed.2d 1039, 1061. See, also,
R.C. 1.47. Concerning DeRolph, interbranch conflict has existed not only between
the judicial and legislative branches but also between the judicial and executive
branches and between the General Assembly and the Governor. It is indeed
unfortunate that some persons and segments of the print media have chosen to
convert the DeRolph litigation into a contest between the General Assembly and
the court, the court and the Governor, or, more recently, the General Assembly and
the Governor. The litigation has not been about which branch of government is
stronger, which branch would blink first, or which branch should be the dominant
force. It is about the proper education and future of Ohio’s 1,800,000 public
schoolchildren and those generations of children who will follow. Obviously, at
some point the questions before each of the branches of our government must be
resolved—and this must be accomplished while preserving the independent role of
each branch without the actual or perceived subjugation of one branch to another.
       {¶ 77} That is not to suggest that we, as elected officials, should forgo our
duties and responsibilities. All elected officials take an oath of office to uphold the
Constitution. Section 7, Article XV, Ohio Constitution. See, also, Clause 3, Article
VI, United States Constitution. Clearly, when a case is properly before the court
for review and final determination, we as judges are not at liberty to ignore our
obligations. “Under the long-standing doctrine of judicial review, it is our sworn




                                          28
                                January Term, 2001




duty to determine whether the General Assembly has enacted legislation that is
constitutional.” DeRolph, 78 Ohio St.3d at 198, 677 N.E.2d at 737, citing Marbury
v. Madison (1803), 5 U.S. (1 Cranch) 137, 2 L.Ed. 60.              Deference to the
corresponding branches of government does not mean abdication. See United
States v. Nixon, 418 U.S. at 704-705, 94 S.Ct. at 3106, 41 L.Ed.2d at 1062
(“Notwithstanding the deference each branch must accord the others, the ‘judicial
Power of the United States’ vested in the federal courts by Art. III, [Sec.] 1, of the
Constitution can no more be shared with the Executive Branch than the Chief
Executive, for example, can share with the Judiciary the veto power, or the
Congress share with the Judiciary the power to override a Presidential veto. Any
other conclusion would be contrary to the basic concept of separation of powers
and the checks and balances that flow from the scheme of a tripartite government.
The Federalist [Papers] No. 47, p. 313 [S. Mittell ed. 1938]”). Thus, the propriety
of our review of this matter is well established and should no longer be under attack.
The judicial branch is the final arbiter in interpreting the Constitution. Marbury v.
Madison (1803), 5 U.S. (1 Cranch) 137, 2 L.Ed. 60. While it is the duty of the
legislative branch to draft laws, it is the duty of the courts to say what the law is.
Id. at 177, 2 L.Ed. at 73.
        {¶ 78} While deference should be accorded each branch of government, we
must all remember that the primary rationale behind the separation-of-powers
doctrine is preservation of the public trust. The will of the people is of paramount
concern, and special interests should not be allowed to prevail over public ones.
The Federalist Papers No. 51 (Madison 1788) (Wills Ed. 1982), at 264.
        {¶ 79} The will of the people in regard to public education has been
declared by the citizens of this state through Section 2, Article VI of the Ohio
Constitution. Miller v. Korns (1923), 107 Ohio St. 287, 297, 140 N.E. 773, 776.
Accordingly, respect for separation of powers has led us to scrupulously avoid
crafting a school-funding remedy in DeRolph I and II. Out of deference to the




                                         29
                              SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




General Assembly, as well as to the Governor, we have recognized that the scope
of our review is limited to determining whether the funding method meets the
educational mandate of the Ohio Constitution. We have indicated our belief that
the crafting of a new funding formula is clearly a legislative function. Thus, we
have previously declined to instruct the General Assembly regarding the specifics
of the legislation that it should enact. DeRolph I, 78 Ohio St.3d at 212-213, 677
N.E.2d at 747. See, also, DeRolph II, 89 Ohio St.3d at 33-38, 728 N.E.2d at 1019-
1022.
                                Justice Cook’s Dissent
        {¶ 80} The dissent of Justice Cook criticizes the majority for “order[ing] the
General Assembly to make specific changes that are ‘required’ before the current
funding plan will be constitutional: adjusting the base cost formula and accelerating
by two years the full funding of the ‘parity aid program.’ By ordering particular
legislative action—based on its own concept of what is necessary to guarantee
educational quality—the majority has made an initial policy determination that the
judiciary is ill equipped to make and that is characteristic of nonjusticiability.” With
all due respect to the dissenter, the majority does no such thing.
        {¶ 81} In DeRolph I, a majority of this court recognized that a school-
financing system based on residual budgeting was flawed. DeRolph I, 78 Ohio St.3d
at 199, 677 N.E.2d at 738. See, also, id. at 261, 677 N.E.2d at 780 (Resnick, J.,
concurring). We found that public education was then funded with the residue after
other mandated government programs had been funded. Id. at 199, 677 N.E.2d at 738.
Therefore, we indicated, the base cost of an adequate education as determined by the
General Assembly had “no real relation to what it actually costs to educate a pupil”
because, according to one expert, that amount was “ ‘a budgetary residual, which is
determined as a result of working backwards through the state aid formula after the
legislature determines the total dollars to be allocated to primary and secondary
education.’ ” Id. We noted in DeRolph I that “[o]ur state Constitution was drafted




                                           30
                                    January Term, 2001




with the importance of education in mind” and that a formula that establishes the base
cost of an adequate education after determining the total dollars to be allocated to
primary and secondary education “contravenes the clear wording of our Constitution
and the framers’ intent.” Id. at 209, 677 N.E.2d at 745.
        {¶ 82} In DeRolph II, we commended the Governor and the General
Assembly for recognizing that “education can no longer be funded as a residual in the
state budget.” Id., 89 Ohio St.3d at 36, 728 N.E.2d at 1020. However, we noted that
we could not totally discount evidence that residual budgeting methodology remained
in the funding system under review therein. Id. at 19-20, 728 N.E.2d at 1008. Thus,
we held that the “basic aid formula has structural deficiencies and may not in fact
reflect the amount required per pupil to provide an adequate education.” (Emphasis
added.) Id. at 37, 728 N.E.2d at 1021.
        {¶ 83} We are again faced with the same concerns, outlined in DeRolph I and
II, regarding the basic aid amount. The General Assembly’s determination of the
basic aid amount has a substantial effect on the entire funding formula. Thus, the
computation of the base cost per pupil of an adequate education is, in the words of
expert witness Dr. Howard B. Fleeter, “a crucial step in defining the funding needs of
the entire system.”
        {¶ 84} As indicated by the majority, the formula for determining the base cost
of an adequate education is based on the average amount spent per pupil in fiscal year
1999 by “model” school districts. R.C. 3317.012. One hundred twenty-seven model
school districts were used as a basis for calculating the base cost. The model school
districts are those school districts that in fiscal year 1999 had met at least twenty out
of the twenty-seven performance standards established in H.B. 94.                     See R.C.
3317.012(B)(1)(a) through (aa).2 In order to arrive at the number of model school

2. The twenty-seven performance standards set forth in R.C. 3317.012(B)(1) are:
         “(a) A ninety per cent or higher graduation rate;
         “(b) At least seventy-five per cent of fourth graders proficient on the mathematics test
prescribed under division (A)(1) of section 3301.0710 of the Revised Code;




                                               31
                                    SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




         “(c) At least seventy-five per cent of fourth graders proficient on the reading test prescribed
under division (A)(1) of section 3301.0710 of the Revised Code;
         “(d) At least seventy-five per cent of fourth graders proficient on the writing test prescribed
under division (A)(1) of section 3301.0710 of the Revised Code;
         “(e) At least seventy-five per cent of fourth graders proficient on the citizenship test
prescribed under division (A)(1) of section 3301.0710 of the Revised Code;
         “(f) At least seventy-five per cent of fourth graders proficient on the science test prescribed
under division (A)(1) of section 3301.0710 of the Revised Code;
         “(g) At least seventy-five per cent of sixth graders proficient on the mathematics test
prescribed under division (A)(2) of section 3301.0710 of the Revised Code;
         “(h) At least seventy-five per cent of sixth graders proficient on the reading test prescribed
under division (A)(2) of section 3301.0710 of the Revised Code;
         “(i) At least seventy-five per cent of sixth graders proficient on the writing test prescribed
under division (A)(2) of section 3301.0710 of the Revised Code;
         “(j) At least seventy-five per cent of sixth graders proficient on the citizenship test
prescribed under division (A)(2) of section 3301.0710 of the Revised Code;
         “(k) At least seventy-five per cent of sixth graders proficient on the science test prescribed
under division (A)(2) of section 3301.0710 of the Revised Code;
         “(l) At least seventy-five per cent of ninth graders proficient on the mathematics test
prescribed under Section 4 of Am. Sub. S.B. 55 of the 122nd general assembly;
         “(m) At least seventy-five per cent of ninth graders proficient on the reading test prescribed
under Section 4 of Am. Sub. S.B. 55 of the 122nd general assembly;
         “(n) At least seventy-five per cent of ninth graders proficient on the writing test prescribed
under Section 4 of Am. Sub. S.B. 55 of the 122nd general assembly;
         “(o) At least seventy-five per cent of ninth graders proficient on the citizenship test
prescribed under Section 4 of Am. Sub. S.B. 55 of the 122nd general assembly;
         “(p) At least seventy-five per cent of ninth graders proficient on the science test prescribed
under Section 4 of Am. Sub. S.B. 55 of the 122nd general assembly;
         “(q) At least eighty-five per cent of tenth graders proficient on the mathematics test
prescribed under Section 4 of Am. Sub. S.B. 55 of the 122nd general assembly;
         “(r) At least eighty-five per cent of tenth graders proficient on the reading test prescribed
under Section 4 of Am. Sub. S.B. 55 of the 122nd general assembly;
         “(s) At least eighty-five per cent of tenth graders proficient on the writing test prescribed
under Section 4 of Am. Sub. S.B. 55 of the 122nd general assembly;
         “(t) At least eighty-five per cent of tenth graders proficient on the citizenship test prescribed
under Section 4 of Am. Sub. S.B. 55 of the 122nd general assembly;
         “(u) At least eighty-five per cent of tenth graders proficient on the science test prescribed
under Section 4 of Am. Sub. S.B. 55 of the 122nd general assembly;
         “(v) At least sixty per cent of twelfth graders proficient on the mathematics test prescribed
under division (A)(3) of section 3301.0710 of the Revised Code;
         “(w) At least sixty per cent of twelfth graders proficient on the reading test prescribed under
division (A)(3) of section 3301.0710 of the Revised Code;
         “(x) At least sixty per cent of twelfth graders proficient on the writing test prescribed under
division (A)(3) of section 3301.0710 of the Revised Code;
         “(y) At least sixty per cent of twelfth graders proficient on the citizenship test prescribed
under division (A)(3) of section 3301.0710 of the Revised Code;
         “(z) At least sixty per cent of twelfth graders proficient on the science test prescribed under
division (A)(3) of section 3301.0710 of the Revised Code;




                                                   32
                                      January Term, 2001




districts used in the base cost formula, the General Assembly introduced two factors
into the formula.
         {¶ 85} R.C. 3317.012(B)(1) contains a rounding provision that permits the
inclusion of school districts that did not meet at least twenty of the twenty-seven
academic performance standards. Thus, seven school districts that had achieved
only eighteen or nineteen performance measures were included as model districts
for the purposes of calculating the base cost amount. The result was a reduction in
the base cost in the amount of $40 per student for fiscal year 2002. After reviewing
this aspect of the school-funding plan, Dr. Fleeter remarked:
         “It is difficult to conclude that the addition of these marginally unsuccessful
districts to the list of successful districts occurred for any reason other than the
reduction of the total per pupil cost of an adequate education.”
         {¶ 86} A second factor, income and property wealth screens, was also used
in determining the model school districts to be included in the base cost foundation
formula.     The income screen excludes from consideration of the base cost
calculation those districts that were among the five percent of all districts with the
highest income and those districts that were among the five percent of all districts
with the lowest income. R.C. 3317.012(B)(2). Likewise, the property wealth
screen excludes from consideration those districts that were among the five percent
of all districts with the highest property valuation per pupil and those districts that
were among the five percent of all districts with the lowest property valuation per
pupil. R.C. 3317.012(B)(3). Previously the funding formula had excluded the top
and bottom ten percent of all districts. This change, to a five-percent wealth screen,
allows inclusion of additional successful districts with higher wealth. However,
wealth screening still excludes some two-thirds of the thirty most effective
performing school districts in the state.

        “(aa) An attendance rate for the year of at least ninety-three per cent as defined in section
3302.01 of the Revised Code.”




                                                 33
                                  SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




         {¶ 87} In its brief, the state justified the removal of these districts from the
calculation of the base cost by quoting David Monk, the Dean of the College of
Education at Pennsylvania State University. He described Dr. John Augenblick’s
original recommendation by stating:
         “ ‘A 5% exclusion of this kind is a well established practice within the field
of school finance given the common existence of highly atypical school districts in
the tails of wealth and income distributions.’ ”
         {¶ 88} However, we agree with plaintiffs’ argument that the income and
property wealth screens were implemented “solely to eliminate high wealth
districts, since no district at the bottom of the wealth spectrum satisfied the 20 out
of 27 performance standards, while most of the districts on the high end of the
wealth spectrum easily surpassed the 20 of 27 benchmark.” The result was that,
through the introduction of wealth screens, the state was able to reduce the basic
aid amount by $110 per pupil.
         {¶ 89} The state used a third and, for our purposes, final procedure for
calculating the base cost amount. This method is set forth in the last paragraph of R.C.
3317.012(B) and is referred to as the “echo effect” provision. For those school
districts that qualified as model districts in FY99 and that had also met the required
performance criteria of the statute in effect in FY96, R.C. 3317.012(B) provides that
the base cost is calculated from the expenditures per pupil for those districts in FY96
or FY99, whichever year is lower.3 The rationale behind this provision, as stated in
the statute, was that “the increased state funding may have driven the districts’
expenditures beyond the expenditures that were actually needed to maintain their
educational programs at the level necessary to maintain their ability to meet the fiscal
year 1999 performance criteria of current division (B)(1) of this section.”
         {¶ 90} However, as noted by Dr. Fleeter:


3. The 1996 figures were adjusted for inflation.




                                                   34
                                 January Term, 2001




        “In general, the Echo effect adjustment totally ignores the contribution
made by local taxes to the base cost amount. The data show that local revenue
increases accounted for more of the total dollar increase than that for which State
aid accounted. * * *
        “By assuming that State aid may have caused districts to exceed the amount
needed to fund an adequate education, the General Assembly also tacitly assumes
the voters in those districts undertook $112 million in additional tax burden
unnecessarily. This assumption has no support in any empirical data.” (Emphasis
sic.)
        {¶ 91} With the introduction of an “echo effect” provision, the General
Assembly reduced the per-pupil basic aid figure by $181.
        {¶ 92} It is obvious from the foregoing that those provisions discussed above,
rounding, wealth screens, and “echo effect,” violate the Thorough and Efficient
Clause set forth in Section 2, Article VI of the Ohio Constitution. Those provisions
have “no real relation to what it actually costs to educate a pupil.” DeRolph I, 78 Ohio
St.3d at 199, 677 N.E.2d at 738. Simply stated, those provisions were inserted into
HB 94 as residual, cost-based budgeting methods designed to do nothing more than
lower the basic aid amount to a figure that is palatable to the General Assembly.
        {¶ 93} This court has the power and the duty to sever those provisions of
legislation that offend the dictates set forth in our Ohio Constitution. The General
Assembly acknowledges this power in stating legislative intent in R.C. 1.50:
        “If any provision of a section of the Revised Code or the application thereof
to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other
provisions or applications of the section or related sections which can be given effect
without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions are
severable.”




                                          35
                              SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




         {¶ 94} The test for determining whether an unconstitutional provision may be
severable is set forth in Geiger v. Geiger (1927), 117 Ohio St. 451, 466, 160 N.E. 28,
33:
         “ ‘(1) Are the constitutional and the unconstitutional parts capable of
separation so that each may be read and may stand by itself? (2) Is the unconstitutional
part so connected with the general scope of the whole as to make it impossible to give
effect to the apparent intention of the Legislature if the clause or part is stricken out?
(3) Is the insertion of words or terms necessary in order to separate the constitutional
part from the unconstitutional part, and to give effect to the former only?’ ” Id.,
quoting State v. Bickford (1914), 28 N.D. 36, 147 N.W. 407, paragraph nineteen of
the syllabus.
         {¶ 95} Those offending provisions, the last paragraph of R.C. 3317.012(B)(1)
(rounding), R.C. 3317.012(B)(2) and (3) (wealth screens), and the last paragraph of
R.C. 3317.012(B) (echo effect), and the remaining, unoffending sections of HB 94
may each be read, and each may stand, by itself. Further, the unconstitutional
provisions are not so essentially connected with the remainder of HB 94 that by
eliminating those provisions the enactment will lose its intent. Therefore, we need
only excise the constitutionally offensive sections and need not add any other
language to give effect to its remedial scheme. Thus modified, the remainder of HB
94 continues to give effect to the intent of the General Assembly, which is, of course,
to provide a thorough and efficient system of funding for public education.
         {¶ 96} Similarly, the majority has also found it necessary to sever that
provision of the state’s parity aid program requiring a phase-in of the program in full
by FY06. R.C. 3317.0217(C) and (D). We have previously voiced our concern
regarding the General Assembly’s practice of phasing in certain parts of the school-
funding formula. DeRolph II, 89 Ohio St.3d at 18-19, 728 N.E.2d at 1007 (phase-in
aspect of basic aid amount). In response to the phasing-in of parity aid, Dr. Fleeter
noted:




                                           36
                                  January Term, 2001




        “The fact that Sub. H.B. 94 would phase-in Parity aid in incremental steps
further undermines the ability of the new program to achieve systematic reform.
Parity aid amounts to the major element of the legislation intended to address the
unconstitutional overreliance on the local property tax in Ohio’s school funding
system. In this context, Parity aid offers the prospect of alleviating a small part of that
overreliance initially. ‘Full’ relief would require five years to achieve.”
        {¶ 97} Without striking the phase-in provision from R.C. 3317.0217(C) and
(D), the legislation drafted by the General Assembly in response to DeRolph I and II
will not meet the mandate of a thorough and efficient system set forth in Section 2,
Article VI of the Ohio Constitution.
        {¶ 98} Therefore, contrary to Justice Cook’s belief, the majority is not
thrusting itself into the legislative arena. Nor is the majority by severing those
offending portions of HB 94 making public policy determinations reserved for the
General Assembly. Our actions are not in disregard of the doctrine of separation of
powers or offensive to our constitutional form of government. We are not imposing
our will on the General Assembly or the people of this great state. We are merely
performing our sworn duty of determining “whether the General Assembly has
enacted legislation that is constitutional.” DeRolph I, 78 Ohio St.3d at 198, 677
N.E.2d at 737.
                                         Options
        {¶ 99} It is important to review what options this court had before it while
deciding DeRolph III. As in every case, before finally deciding what decision the
court is to make, the question that must always be asked is, what will be the next step
and the step after that?
                           A. Approve the New Legislation
        {¶ 100} The court could simply approve the legislation and walk away.
Without severing those offending portions as ordered in the Chief Justice’s majority
opinion, this option lacked credibility and was never supported by a court majority.




                                            37
                                  SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




      B. Declare the New Legislation Unconstitutional and Do Nothing Else
         {¶ 101} Assume, as some will forcefully argue, that the funding formula
enacted by the General Assembly and signed by the Governor fails to pass
constitutional muster and a majority of the court simply declares it unconstitutional.
This option presents at least two problems. If a majority of the court would say to
the General Assembly and the Governor, “Try again,” what would that mean?
Merely declaring the statutes unconstitutional and returning the matter to the
General Assembly, without more detailed and specific direction would appear to
be an act of futility. Only one member of this court was willing to take this step.
It would leave the existing paralysis without treatment.
         {¶ 102} The second problem could be even more acute. If the court were to
say that the legislation is unconstitutional, then, arguably, there would be a return to
pre-existing funding levels. Such an action would, by the state’s calculations, return
to the state’s general fund the $1,400,000,0004 appropriated by the General Assembly


4. It has been widely reported by the Governor and the General Assembly that with the enactment
of HB 94, an additional $1.4 billion has been budgeted to fund primary and secondary education.
However, despite the exuberance of these sources, I am at a loss to confirm their calculations,
especially when the state’s brief fails to cite such an enormous figure. At most, the state argues in
its brief that the current basic aid figure of $4,814 is an increase of twelve percent per student in
2001. Apparently, the state is referring to the increase of $520 between the FY01 $4,294 figure of
HB 650, and the current FY02 figure of $4,814. Yet, the state fails to credit the level at which HB
650 would have funded the FY02 budget, which would have been $4,414. Thus, the increase would
be only nine percent or $400 per pupil.
          In addition, the state fails to reconcile its claims with the fact that it has reduced the
maximum cost-of-doing-business factor from eighteen percent to 7.5 percent, further eroding the
enormous gains it purports to fund. In fact, and by example, Hamilton County under HB 650 would
have received $5,084 per pupil, yet with the reduction in the cost-of-doing-business factor under
HB 94, Hamilton County will actually receive $5,175. Thus, after the reduction in the cost-of-
doing-business factor, the $520 base cost increase trumpeted by the state yields a meager $91 gain
for Hamilton County over what it would have received under HB 650. Other counties face similar
circumstances.
          While this court does not set legislative policy, I do find it curious that in 1995 the
legislature allowed a maximum cost-of-doing-business factor of 7.5 percent. Former R.C.
3317.02(E), 1995 Am.Sub.H.B. No. 117, 146 Ohio Laws, Part I, 1203. But realizing that cost
disparities between some counties were as much as thirty-six percent, the legislature, through the
enactment of HB 215, decided to phase in an increase to a maximum of eighteen percent to offset
the disparity. Former R.C. 3317.02(E)(2), 147 Ohio Laws, Part I, 1214. Yet here we are, but four




                                                 38
                                      January Term, 2001




to finance the plan now before us. These funds would then presumably be reallocated
to the other state institutions and programs so severely cut to accommodate the school-
funding plan. While one or more of us would welcome the return of support for higher
education, mental health, protection of battered women, prison security, payment of
wrongfully withheld child support, and other worthwhile and needed state
responsibilities, the negative practical effect of such an action outweighs the benefits.
         {¶ 103} Each school district in this state presumably already has a budget
for at least the coming year. If we were to reject the plan before us, over the course
of the next biennium the Cleveland Municipal School District would lose almost
$34,000,000. The Columbus City School District would lose over $33,000,000.
Toledo City School District would lose $19,679,912. South-Western City in
Franklin County would lose over $17,000,000; Lakota Local in Butler County
almost $13,000,000; Akron City, over $12,000,000; Ohio Valley Local,
$9,500,000; Hilliard City, $8,700,000; Canton City, $7,384,424. Lorain City,
Dayton City, Mason City in Warren County, Pickerington Local in Fairfield
County, Parma City, Euclid City, and Dublin City would each lose between
$9,500,000 and $6,700,000.
         {¶ 104} Benton Carroll Salem Local in Ottawa County would lose over the
biennium an increase of one hundred ninety-one percent; Wolf Creek Local in
Washington County, one hundred seventy-seven percent; River View Local in
Coshocton County, one hundred fifty-three percent; Three Rivers Local in
Hamilton County, one hundred forty-five percent; College Corner Local in Preble
County, one hundred thirty-four percent; Edison Local in Jefferson County, one


years later, and the legislature has decided to revert to the 7.5 percent maximum. Moreover, the 7.5
percent maximum that is reinstated in HB 94 does not assign the same cost-of-doing-business factors
to the various counties as were assigned prior to HB 650. In fact, fifty-five of eighty-eight counties
have been assigned lower cost-of-doing-business factors. In the words of Dr. Fleeter, one of the
experts in this case, “One can only conclude that the driving force behind this change is either the
desire to transfer state aid from urban areas to rural areas or simply the desire to seemingly increase
the foundation level without paying the full price for doing so.”




                                                  39
                              SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




hundred fourteen percent; Avon Lake City in Lorain County, one hundred eleven
percent; and Woodridge Local in Summit County, ninety-seven percent. The list
goes on and on, but the increases provided by the plan (and the additional funds to
be made available by the court’s majority opinion of today) are truly significant.
Gallia County School District in Gallia County will receive over the two-year
period an increase from $5,864,774 to $10,686,054, and all of these dollar figures
and percentages are calculated before the additions that will accrue to each district
after the majority opinion is fully carried out.
       {¶ 105} If a majority of the court would say that not enough has yet been
done and the Governor, the General Assembly, and the court study the matter again
for a year or two, it is fair to ask, how long would it take, even if there was a new
acceptable plan, to make up what each district would lose during the
study/discussion period? Answering our own question, there is not a court majority
willing to risk losing what has already been gained.
       {¶ 106} The option of merely declaring the legislation unconstitutional and
allowing the General Assembly to enact yet another plan is not viable.
                         C. Special Master or Commission
       {¶ 107} Appointment of a special master or commission has been
discussed.   There has been little or no support for a single special master.
Appointment of an independent five-member blue ribbon commission composed
of members with specific expertise in law, finance, taxation, educational
excellence, and labor relations, for the purpose of developing a plan that meets the
requirements of both DeRolph I and DeRolph II and then submitting it to the court
for consideration and a possible order to enact it, has been seriously considered and
has engendered greater support among us. This idea has failed because, as a former
justice of this court was fond of saying during my early tenure on the court, “The
name of the game is four.” Only three members of the court supported this option.
There were never four votes for this approach.




                                          40
                                  January Term, 2001




                                    D. Contempt
       {¶ 108} Contempt has been a widely discussed option but, I hasten to
forcefully and unequivocally state, never within the court itself. As this is being
written, I just received a call from a man identifying himself as being from Carroll
County. His message was the same as various members of the court have received
over the last four years. “Don’t cave in to the General Assembly. Find them in
contempt and put them in jail.”
       {¶ 109} While that option has never been seriously discussed among us, let
us explore that option for the benefit of those who would advocate such a
malevolent course of action. Admittedly, if the General Assembly had failed to
comply with the prior court orders and craft a funding formula that passes
constitutional muster, this court (like other courts) is vested with the power to
enforce its orders. But how? Enforcement of any court order poses concerns. The
judicial branch has no concrete powers like the sword (executive) or the purse
(legislative) with which to carry its judgments into effect. Paulsen, The Most
Dangerous Branch: Executive Power to Say What the Law Is (1994), 83 Geo.L.J.
217, 219. In fact, the judicial branch has been referred to as the “least dangerous”
branch of government. The Federalist Papers No. 78 (Hamilton 1788) (Wills
Ed.1982), at 393. Courts do not possess their own army or a police department to
enforce their orders and judgments. Instead, as Hamilton observed, the judiciary is
dependent upon the executive department for the efficacy of its judgments. Id. at
393-394. See, also, Paulsen, 83 Geo.L.J. at 219.
       {¶ 110} These practical problems of enforcement remain the same, and are,
in fact, exacerbated because today we live in different times. We hear from certain
members of the General Assembly that we can say whatever we want but those
pronouncements will be ignored. We hear some members of the General Assembly
saying that impeachment of one or more justices might be in order and, in fact, we
have one self-proclaimed constitutional law expert, a professor, advocating our




                                         41
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




impeachment or removal from office and stating that the General Assembly has a
duty to ignore court orders that he says we have no right to issue, notwithstanding
that we are doing what we believe the oath means when we swear “to support the
constitution of the United States and the constitution of this state” and “to
administer justice without respect to persons.” R.C. 3.23.
       {¶ 111} Are we afraid? No. We fear not for ourselves but for those who
would forget their place in our constitutional system of governance and ignore the
wisdom of our founding fathers. Are we practical? Yes. We recognize that we
have no army and no police force to send. We have only our ability to reason,
persuade, and even plead with the Governor and General Assembly to do what is
right and best for schoolchildren in Ohio.
                  E. Possible Solutions to Funding Inadequacies
       {¶ 112} We have been criticized, sometimes by the very same people, both
for entering the fray at all and for not spelling out exactly “what you want us to do.”
We recognize this “can’t win” position, but a few comments may now be in order.
There have now been a legion of challenges in various states to the funding of
public education. To date, courts in seventeen states have found their public
education financing systems to be unconstitutional. Lundberg, State Courts and
School Funding: A Fifty-State Analysis (2000), 63 Alb.L.Rev. 1101.              These
holdings have been based on state constitutional language the same as or similar to
our own. What we have done is hardly an aberration.
       {¶ 113} Certainly Ohio’s schoolchildren are better off today than they were
before DeRolph I and DeRolph II.          New facilities have been and are being
constructed. Learning materials, including books, have been updated and replaced.
Student-teacher ratios have been decreased. Technology has been introduced and
improved. We recognize that more must be done, but the impetus is now at work.
With the basic plan and the additional provisions spelled out in the majority opinion
and under the prodding and capable leadership of the Governor, the General




                                          42
                                January Term, 2001




Assembly, the Ohio Coalition for Equity and Adequacy of School Funding, and
this court have gone a long way toward rectifying school funding inadequacies. Is
the solution perfect? No. Is the solution adequate? I hope so. The constitutional
mandate is one of adequacy—not equality.
                                    Other States
       {¶ 114} It would have been appropriate for the Governor and the General
Assembly to have drawn on the experiences of other states to solve what, by any fair
observer’s review, has been a problem in our state for a very long time—inadequate
funding of public education and decrepit school buildings (a 1996 United States
General Accounting Office report points out that ninety-five percent of Ohio’s school
buildings need upgrades and repairs [U.S. GAO Report No. HEHS-96-148 “School
Facilities: Profiles of School Condition by State”]). We hope that the Governor and
General Assembly will look further at the problem and draw on the experiences of
such states as Kentucky and Vermont. In fact, we would do well to study, and perhaps
emulate, the strategy employed by our sister states of Michigan and Minnesota in
solving their school-funding inadequacies.
       {¶ 115} In his recent book, The DeRolph Case: Ohio’s Struggle for a
Constitutional School Finance System (2001), Professor Richard Lucier, a Denison
University economics professor, makes the point and specifically details the
Michigan experience. Id. at 159-171. Admittedly, the initiative was bold, the
medicine distasteful, and political futures uncertain.        But with strong and
imaginative gubernatorial and legislative bipartisan leadership, Michigan’s leaders
and its citizens struck a strong blow not only for schoolchildren but also themselves.
In doing so, the Michigan plan relieved the heavy burden on overtaxed owners of
real estate, many of whom were property holders trying to reconcile what had
become an oppressive burden of trying to do what was right—support local
schools—with what was financially feasible. But it was not just homeowners who




                                         43
                              SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




benefited. After all, commercial and industrial real property is also taxed, and these
business interests also benefited.
        {¶ 116} In 1993, Governor John Engler and Michigan legislative leaders
jointly supported a constitutional amendment designed to reduce local property
taxes by nearly fifty percent and to replace the lost property tax revenue for schools
by a corresponding state sales tax increase—a method not unfamiliar to Ohio
voters. Id. at 159. The amendment was defeated by Michigan voters by a margin
of fifty-five percent to forty-five percent. Id. at 159-160. Governor Engler’s
proposal included a state foundation grant of $4,800 per pupil—in 1993! Id. at 163.
Today, some eight years later, our base figure in Ohio is $4,814 for FY02.
Michigan’s number for FY02 is $6,300. Mich.Comp.Laws Ann. 388.1620.
        {¶ 117} In any event, Governor Engler and the members of the General
Assembly in Michigan were not willing to accept the 1993 defeat. Id. at 160. The
minority leader of the senate, State Senator (and now United States Senator) Debbie
Stabenow, a Democrat, introduced legislation that, if approved, would entirely
eliminate local property taxes as a source of revenue for public education. The
legislature did not dilly-dally. Within twenty-four hours the legislation was approved
by a vote in the state senate of twenty-nine to five and in the house by a vote of sixty-
nine to thirty-five. Id. at 160 and fn. 6. In August 1993, Governor Engler signed the
bill, and the massive tax cut, $6.5 billion, became reality. Id. at 159. Suddenly, local
property taxes for school funding were reduced to zero. Id. With two-thirds of the
funding for primary and secondary education eliminated and no provision to replace
the lost revenue, decision time was at hand. Id.
        {¶ 118} The Michigan General Assembly responded with courage and
dispatch. Two plans for reform were adopted. Id. at 163. The first was a ballot
proposal. It proposed a constitutional amendment increasing the state sales tax in
an amount that would, if approved, provide $10.2 billion in combined state-local
revenue and, thereby, completely change forever the method by which public




                                           44
                                   January Term, 2001




education in Michigan is financed.         No longer would there have to be an
overreliance on local real estate taxes to fund the educational system. The other
plan, a statutory plan, would automatically take effect if voters rejected the sales
tax plan.    That legislation, already approved and in place, provided for the
replacement of most of the local property tax cuts with increased state income taxes
if the ballot plan failed. Id.
        {¶ 119} On March 15, 1994, the voters of Michigan, having had a complete
and comprehensive program submitted to them, overwhelmingly approved the
ballot sales tax plan by sixty-nine to thirty-one percent. Id. at 165. The referendum
was on the ballot in a primary election in a nonpresidential year, yet the voter
turnout was forty-one percent, a substantial response by the Michigan electorate.
Id. at 165, fn. 23. With one master stroke, and admirable gubernatorial and
legislative intestinal fortitude, local property tax revenue funding had been reduced
to about twenty percent of the total of school funding with the state’s share and the
sales tax making up the other eighty percent of the school funding revenue.
        {¶ 120} Minnesota’s experience in solving its public school financing crisis
is also worthy of comprehensive review. However, rather than detail that story, I
attach as an appendix the well-reasoned and well-presented column by Chris
Sheridan, associate editor of the Plain Dealer’s editorial pages. According to the
column, the average per-pupil spending from the state (Minnesota) for 2001-2002
“will    amount     to    nearly     $6,900.”     (See    ftp://ftp.sconet.state.oh.us
\opinions/2001/governor.pdf.)
        {¶ 121} Some members of this court wish that we in Ohio could have gotten
together on a plan the same as or similar to those enacted in Michigan and
Minnesota. We recognize that “hope springs eternal in the human breast.” Maybe
yet there will be a brave soul or two who will step forward to propose that we
overhaul the system so that instead of just tweaking what we have, real and
substantial reform takes place and the systematic overhaul so eloquently called for




                                          45
                              SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




by Justice Sweeney in DeRolph I takes place. Illustrative of the seriousness of the
overall problem is the article from the Wall Street Journal of July 18, 2001, which
is appended hereto. (See ftp://ftp.sconet.state.oh.us\opinions/2001/wsj.pdf.) I hurt
for my hometown, Toledo, and all the many other Ohio communities that find
themselves in like circumstances. Unfortunately, what the article depicts is the
rule—not the exception!
                                     Conclusion
        {¶ 122} After reviewing the specific options set forth above and a number
of other alternatives not listed, we realized that each option was not practical or
could not attract a majority vote of the court. Recognizing that it is the primary
mission of this court to accept cases that properly invoke its jurisdiction under the
Constitution, read briefs and hear arguments on those cases, decide the cases, and
then publish opinions to assist the bench, bar, and litigants of this state, a majority
of the court came to today’s conclusion knowing that a two-two-two-one or a three-
three-one or any other combination of votes short of a majority of four would not
be meeting our constitutional obligations.
        {¶ 123} Certain members of the majority had to forgo their argument on
lack of jurisdiction. Other members of the majority had to overcome the feeling
that what has been presented to the court is nothing more than a massaging of the
system, that is, the funding legislation before us still looks like, walks like and
quacks like, and, therefore, is still residual budgeting; that under the plan the school
facilities problems will not be taken care of during the lifetime of a now middle-
aged person; that the overreliance on local property taxes for educational funding
has not really been solved for the long run and that there has not been a “complete,
systematic overhaul” of the educational funding system for students in the K-12
grades called for in DeRolph I. Id., 78 Ohio St.3d at 212, 677 N.E.2d at 747.
Finally, one member of the majority had to forgo insisting that in Ohio, education
is a fundamental right.




                                          46
                                   January Term, 2001




       {¶ 124} Once these chasms had been closed the more obvious problems that
could not be ignored could be met head on. Thus, today we hold that to meet the
constitutional requirements of Section 2, Article VI of the Ohio Constitution that
there be a thorough and efficient system of common schools throughout the state,
the so-called echo-effect adjustment must be eliminated, the rounding-up procedure
cannot be used, and the income and property wealth screens must be removed when
determining the base cost of an adequate education. In addition, the current phase-
in aspect of the parity aid program, which is repugnant to a thorough and efficient
system of public education, is eliminated. Finally, we urge that the Governor and
General Assembly look at other ways and means to resolve the facilities problems
that face almost every school district in our state.
       {¶ 125} State Senator Jeff Jacobson is widely recognized as the architect of
the plan now before us. At a press briefing on Thursday, April 12, 2001, he said,
“I think that the court was right in what they did in DeRolph I and II.” Sunny
Senators, http://www.capitolgate.com/OH/pressroom/leadstory.asp?id=35.               (or
see ftp://ftp.sconet.state.oh.us\opinions/2001/senators.pdf.)     More recently, on
Friday, July 27, 2001, the Senator said, “[I]f you read their decision [DeRolph I and
DeRolph II], it was a very moderate decision. It was very wise. It was not the type
of decision that would lead by itself to a constitutional crisis and yet that’s the way
many        people       treated        it.”            Holding       Out          Hope,
http://www.capitolgate.com/OH/pressroom/leadstory.asp?id=109.                (or     see
ftp://ftp.sconet.state.oh.us\opinions/2001/hope.pdf.) Certainly Senator Jacobson
has never been known as some wild-eyed liberal, and these comments of his, in his
capacity as a father, a state senator, and a lawyer, should lay to rest the notion that
the court did something wrong in accepting jurisdiction over a legitimate case or
controversy with constitutional ramifications. It is not as if we went out to the
corner of Broad and High in Columbus and engaged in champerty. We did not ask
for the case, but when such a case arrives here it is our sworn obligation to resolve




                                           47
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




it based on the law, the facts, and our own personal oaths with regard to interpreting
and supporting our Ohio Constitution. We do not have any subcommittee to refer
the matter to for purposes of letting it die. We decide it as we must and should.
       {¶ 126} The new majority finds that, once modified, the legislation will
meet the required constitutional standard. That is, the legislation will then not be
unconstitutional beyond a reasonable doubt. State ex rel. Dickman v. Defenbacher
(1955), 164 Ohio St. 142, 57 O.O. 134, 128 N.E.2d 59, paragraph one of the
syllabus.
       {¶ 127} To some, we will have done too much. To others, we will have fallen
woefully short of the ultimate goal. To those of us in the majority, we will have seen
our duty and discharged it in a manner consistent with our sworn obligations.
       {¶ 128} In 1776, when John Adams was traveling to Philadelphia from his
home in Massachusetts to participate in the major issue of his day—the independence
of the Colonies—his wife, Abigail Adams, wrote to him. She said: “You cannot be,
I know, nor do I wish to see you, an inactive spectator. * * * We have too many high
sounding words, and too few actions that correspond with them.” McCullough, John
Adams (2001) 21.
       {¶ 129} We entered into this enterprise knowing that our actions, whatever we
might do or not do, would be subject to much commentary, review, and criticism. We
could not and would not, however, be inactive spectators uttering high-sounding
words without corresponding actions.
       {¶ 130} Accordingly, I concur. In concurring, I understand that it is the
intention of the majority that the General Assembly will, within a reasonable period
of time, make the changes set forth in the majority opinion. If the General Assembly
does not comply, any aggrieved party can return to us by reinvoking our jurisdiction.
See Harris v. Harris (1979), 58 Ohio St.2d 303, 307, 12 O.O.3d 291, 293, 390 N.E.2d
789, 792. In that event, a more comprehensive order could very well be entered, and




                                         48
                                 January Term, 2001




we, having gone the extra mile, would seek enforcement of that order through means
available to the court.
        {¶ 131} I respectfully concur.
        PFEIFER, J., concurs in the foregoing concurring opinion.
                               __________________
        PFEIFER, J., concurring.
        {¶ 132} I concur in Chief Justice Moyer’s majority opinion and join the
concurring opinion of Justice Douglas. H.B. 94, fully funded, will “smooth out the
unconscionable funding inequities that exist between school districts in this state.”
DeRolph v. State (1997), 78 Ohio St.3d 193, 262, 677 N.E.2d 733, 780 (Pfeifer, J.,
concurring).       Although Ohio’s school-funding scheme has thus been made
constitutional, it is legitimate to observe that the system continues to rely heavily on
local property taxes. That concern could be eased by rethinking the issue of funding
for school buildings.
        {¶ 133} The General Assembly has adopted a plan to build new classrooms
and rehabilitate existing classrooms in this state. If the Governor and General
Assembly were to ask Ohio voters to approve an expansion of the state’s debt
authority for the single purpose of funding one hundred percent of school
construction and repair, it would be an enormous boost to educational opportunity
across this state. It would also serve the collateral purpose of substantially reducing
the system’s reliance on local property taxes.
        {¶ 134} Well-built and well-kept school buildings say something to the
children who are in them now and say something to future generations. School
buildings are tangible evidence that we cared, that we saw an opportunity to help our
children, and that we accepted our responsibility to do so. The General Assembly has
reached for and achieved a constitutional system of common schools. There is room
to reach higher.
                               __________________




                                          49
                              SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




        LUNDBERG STRATTON, J., concurring.
        {¶ 135} I respectfully concur in the judgment of the majority. I write simply
to clarify that I still adhere to my position outlined in the dissents in DeRolph I and
II, and still believe that the “Constitution requires the General Assembly to ‘make
such provisions, by taxation or otherwise, as * * * will secure a thorough and
efficient system of common schools throughout the state.’ ” (Emphasis added.)
DeRolph v. State (1997), 78 Ohio St.3d 193, 264, 677 N.E.2d 733, 782 (Moyer,
C.J., dissenting), quoting Section 2, Article VI, Ohio Constitution.
        {¶ 136} The law, as recently amended by the General Assembly, increases
school funding by millions of dollars and has dramatically increased funding in
many areas. These changes, along with modifications ordered in this majority
opinion, persuaded two justices from the former majority to find that the school-
funding plan is constitutional. Had I continued to dissent, the gridlock in this case
would have continued to the detriment of all the parties, including most importantly
Ohio’s schoolchildren. Thus, my vote to join the majority is not an implicit finding
that the former plan was unconstitutional, but is rather a pragmatic compromise to
resolve an impasse that I believe has been divisive for too long and for which the
alternatives proposed by the dissents are truly unacceptable.              Therefore, I
respectfully concur.
                                __________________
        ALICE ROBIE RESNICK, J., dissenting.
        {¶ 137} In its Machiavellian maneuver to halt this litigation, the majority
gives its seal of approval to a system of public education that, even with the
judicially legislated adjustments of the majority, falls well short of the system
required by the Ohio Constitution. In doing so, a majority of this court abandons
adherence to the requirements of the Ohio Constitution and puts an end to this
litigation, even while recognizing that the General Assembly’s enactments are
unsatisfactory. It is indeed ironic that one thing all the justices (both in the majority




                                           50
                                 January Term, 2001




and in dissent) of this court agreed on in both DeRolph v. State (1997), 78 Ohio
St.3d 193, 677 N.E.2d 733 (“DeRolph I”), and DeRolph v. State (2000), 89 Ohio
St.3d 1, 728 N.E.2d 993 (“DeRolph II”), was that it was the General Assembly’s
task, not that of this court, to enact school-funding legislation. Now, a majority of
this court has determined that, for the sake of expediency, harmony, and consensus,
it is acceptable for this court to sit as a superlegislature and enact its own version
of a constitutionally acceptable school-funding plan. The majority states:
        “A climate of legal, financial, and political uncertainty concerning Ohio’s
school-funding system has prevailed at least since this court accepted jurisdiction
of the case. We have concluded that no one is served by continued uncertainty and
fractious debate. In that spirit, we have created the consensus that should terminate
the role of this court in the dispute.”
        {¶ 138} The majority’s creation of this consensus provides an uncertain
future for the children and citizens of Ohio for two reasons. The first, of course, is
that this court has no authority to order the level of spending or impose other
specific requirements that would make the state’s system of funding education
constitutional. The second is that the General Assembly must accept the majority’s
judicial mandates and enact legislation that complies with this court’s order.
Judging by past history, when will that take place?
        {¶ 139} The defendants have once again resisted as too politically
unpopular the fundamental changes required to bring our public school system into
compliance with the Constitution. Instead, the defendants have merely tweaked the
system that was rejected by this court in two previous decisions. They have
stamped “new and improved” on a system that is neither, and have trumpeted that
this “revised” system, with a supposed massive infusion of cash provided by the
state, satisfies the Constitution. However, it takes much more than money to
accomplish the systematic overhaul of school funding in Ohio that a majority of




                                          51
                              SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




this court in DeRolph I and DeRolph II recognized was required to bring the system
into compliance with our Constitution.
        {¶ 140} Even today’s majority cannot accept the state’s transparent, self-
serving, and expedient portrayal of its inadequate response without judicially
legislating its own amendments in order to arrive at a “constitutional” funding system.
The majority has acquiesced to the desires of the defendants, and has abandoned all
pretense of objectivity, ostensibly in the spirit of creating a consensus. The majority
appears to be working hand in hand with the legislative branch of government when
it quotes Thomas Jefferson as support for its decision to impose a compromise in this
case for “the greater good.” Jefferson was a wise man, but he was certainly not
discussing the function of a supreme court when he wrote of “sacrificing our opinions
sometimes to the opinions of others for the sake of harmony.” The oath of a Supreme
Court justice is to “administer justice without respect to persons.” R.C. 3.23.
Nowhere in that oath is there any recognition of an overriding necessity of harmonious
decisions for the sake of getting along with the other branches of government or of
creating a “consensus” among the members of the court.
        {¶ 141} The role of the Supreme Court is to act independently from the other
two branches of government in determining whether the laws as enacted by the
General Assembly pass constitutional muster. We are not members of the legislature,
where compromise is the order of the day and backroom deals are taken for granted.
Rather, we have taken a sacred oath to support and uphold the Constitution to the best
of our ability and understanding.
        {¶ 142} The majority apparently recognizes that the state’s plan is too flawed
to meet the goals illuminated by two previous decisions of this court. However, rather
than giving the state additional time to enact a constitutional system, the majority, “for
the sake of harmony,” does its own toying with the system, adding its own layer of
legislation to that enacted by the General Assembly. The majority’s determination
that the state must revise its calculations to increase Am.Sub.H.B. No. 94’s basic aid




                                           52
                                 January Term, 2001




amount and must move up the date for the full phase-in of parity aid will cause little
more than an ineffective addition to an inadequate plan and simply does not make the
plan constitutionally acceptable.
       {¶ 143} The majority evaluates the plan not for what the plan actually
accomplishes, but what it wishes the plan would accomplish, including making its
own additions to meet that end. Ignoring the numerous deficiencies along the way,
the majority places its confidence in a General Assembly that has once again failed to
comply with the Constitution.
       {¶ 144} The majority ignores the directives of DeRolph I and DeRolph II,
sets the bar lower than is justified, and then of course finds that the bar has been
cleared. Rather than building upon the analyses of previous decisions of this court,
as the majority purports to do, the majority actually weakens those precedents
beyond recognition and then proclaims that the watered-down standards allegedly
extracted from those decisions have been satisfied. Somehow, a half-hearted
response by the state is portrayed as the basis of an acceptable solution. However,
the majority imposes its own caveat—the solution is acceptable only after the
changes ordered by the majority are implemented.
       {¶ 145} In order to comply, the General Assembly not only must pass
legislation to reflect the majority’s order, but accordingly must find a source of
funding to satisfy the majority’s predilection for what a constitutional level of state
support for schools must be. The majority innocuously asserts that, due to its belief
in the “good faith” of the defendants, it expects the General Assembly to comply. It
blandly states that if its order “receives less than full compliance, interested parties
have remedies available to them.” The possible consequences of a refusal to comply
are glossed over, and the majority does not specifically say what the available
remedies would be. Presumably, if the General Assembly fails to adopt the majority’s
judicially legislated amendments, the majority is prepared to hold the General
Assembly in contempt for its failure, or perhaps take even more drastic action. Since




                                          53
                              SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




what the majority has done is in direct violation of separation of powers, it can do
nothing to effectively enforce its judicial mandates. Moreover, the majority abandons
precedent and enters dangerous territory in ordering that specific legislation must be
enacted to make the school-funding system constitutional. School funding is a
complicated and intricate system. Any changes to one aspect, while appearing to be
straightforward, will cause ripple effects and give rise to unintended consequences in
ways that no justice could possibly anticipate. That is why the specifics of school
funding must be devised by the General Assembly and not this court.
        {¶ 146} Merely raising these concerns illustrates that the majority’s order is
ill advised. The majority, rather than limiting itself to highlighting the deficiencies in
the legislation before us as this court has been careful to do in past cases, now takes it
upon itself actually to order that specific additional legislation be enacted. What the
majority conveniently forgets is that this case has always been centered on satisfying
the Ohio Constitution. The majority now turns that consideration on its head. Instead
of satisfying the Constitution, the additional legislation must satisfy the individual
inclinations of four members of this court, and only the majority’s preferred
legislation, and no other, is acceptable. Where was this majority when DeRolph I and
DeRolph II were decided? If this type of action is legally permissible now, why not
then? This case could have been concluded in 1997 by this court merely legislating a
constitutional system from the bench. But as we all are aware, this court does not
legally possess the power to legislate.
        {¶ 147} What the majority continually fails to appreciate is that our
Constitution envisions much more than a school system that barely meets the
minimum needs of its pupils. Our Constitution envisions a thorough and efficient
school system, not a system built on backroom deals and political expediency. When
the majority proclaims what is essentially a victory for the state in this case, it is
actually knelling defeat for the students and citizens of Ohio.




                                           54
                                     January Term, 2001




        {¶ 148} The majority has ignored that “ ‘[t]he sovereign people made it
mandatory upon the General Assembly to secure not merely a system of common
schools,’ but rather a thorough and efficient system of common schools.” DeRolph
II, 89 Ohio St.3d 1, 728 N.E.2d 993, at paragraph one of the syllabus, quoting Miller
v. Korns (1923), 107 Ohio St. 287, 297-298, 140 N.E. 773, 776. In surrender, the
majority has accepted (and allowed itself to become entangled with) a solution that,
while politically palatable, leaves a bad taste in the mouths of those of us who
recognize the state’s revised plan for what it is—a flawed and incomplete response
to the problems at hand.
        {¶ 149} In this court’s opinion in DeRolph II, a majority of this court found
that Ohio’s method of funding public schools continued to violate the Thorough
and Efficient Clause of the Ohio Constitution. In DeRolph II, at paragraph three of
the syllabus, this court defined the meaning of that clause: “A thorough system
means that each and every school district has enough funds to operate. An efficient
system means one in which each and every school district in the state has an ample
number of teachers, sound buildings that are in compliance with state building and
fire codes, and equipment sufficient for all students to be afforded an educational
opportunity.” With today’s decision, this court, while paying lip service to those
principles, places its imprimatur on a system of education that still fails to meet the
standards for thoroughness and efficiency mandated by the Ohio Constitution.
        {¶ 150} Perhaps some who have been immersed in this litigation have lost
sight of where Ohio stands among the fifty states in meeting the problems in its
school-funding system. Including Ohio, the highest courts of at least sixteen states
have found that their state’s school-funding system violated the state Constitution.5


5. See, e.g., Roosevelt Elementary School Dist. v. Bishop (1994), 179 Ariz. 233, 877 P.2d 806;
DuPree v. Alma School Dist. No. 30 (1983), 279 Ark. 340, 651 S.W.2d 90; Serrano v. Priest (1976),
18 Cal.3d 728, 135 Cal.Rptr. 345, 557 P.2d 929; Horton v. Meskill (1977), 172 Conn. 615, 376 A.2d
359; Rose v. Council for Better Edn. (Ky.1989), 790 S.W.2d 186; McDuffy v. Secy., Executive Office
of Edn. (1993), 415 Mass. 545, 615 N.E.2d 516; Helena Elementary School Dist. No. 1 v. State




                                               55
                                  SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




In addition, several states have had lower courts call into question some or all
aspects of their school-funding system (see, e.g., lower court orders reviewed in
Opinion of the Justices [Ala.1993], 624 So.2d 107, and Bismarck Pub. School Dist.
No. 1 v. State [N.D.1994], 511 N.W.2d 247). Furthermore, some states, including
Michigan (see Section 11, Article IX, Michigan Constitution [amended March 15,
1994 by “Proposal A”] and 1993 Mich.Pub.Act Nos. 145 and 336 and related acts
cited in section 6; see, also, Mich.Comp.Laws Ann. 388.1601 et seq., M.S.A. §
115.1919[901] et seq.) and Kansas (Finance and Quality Performance Act of 1992,
1992 Kansas Session Laws, Ch. 280, Kan.Stat.Ann. 72-6405 et seq.) have
completely revised their school-funding system without a judicial order from the
state’s highest court to do so. Thus, Ohio is definitely not alone on the path it is
pursuing among the states, many of which are facing the same problems we are
facing.
          {¶ 151} Furthermore, Ohio is not by any means the only state in which the
state’s high court has conducted multiple considerations of funding systems that
have bounced back and forth among lower courts, state legislatures, and the highest
court.6 In some other states, school funding has been a persistent problem for much


(1989), 236 Mont. 44, 769 P.2d 684; Claremont School Dist. v. Governor (1997), 142 N.H. 462,
703 A.2d 1353; Abbott v. Burke (1990), 119 N.J. 287, 575 A.2d 359; Tennessee Small School Sys.
v. McWherter (Tenn.1993), 851 S.W.2d 139; Edgewood Indep. School Dist. v. Kirby (Tex.1989),
777 S.W.2d 391; Brigham v. State (1997), 166 Vt. 246, 692 A.2d 384; Seattle School Dist. No. 1 of
King Cty. v. State (1978), 90 Wash.2d 476, 585 P.2d 71; Pauley v. Kelly (1979), 162 W.Va. 672,
255 S.E.2d 859; Washakie Cty. School Dist. One v. Herschler (Wyo.1980), 606 P.2d 310.
6. See, e.g., Roosevelt Elementary School Dist. v. Bishop, supra, 179 Ariz. 233, 877 P.2d 806; Hull
v. Albrecht (1997), 190 Ariz. 520, 950 P.2d 1141; Hull v. Albrecht (1998), 192 Ariz. 34, 960 P.2d
634; Serrano v. Priest (1971), 5 Cal.3d 584, 96 Cal.Rptr. 601, 487 P.2d 1241; Serrano v. Priest,
supra, 18 Cal.3d 728, 135 Cal.Rptr. 345, 557 P.2d 929; Butt v. State (1992), 4 Cal.4th 668, 15
Cal.Rptr.2d 480, 842 P.2d 1240; Horton v. Meskill, supra, 172 Conn. 615, 376 A.2d 359; Horton v.
Meskill (1982), 187 Conn. 187, 445 A.2d 579; Horton v. Meskill (1985), 195 Conn. 24, 486 A.2d
1099; Sheff v. O’Neill (1996), 238 Conn. 1, 678 A.2d 1267; Claremont School Dist. v. Governor
(1993), 138 N.H. 183, 635 A.2d 1375; Claremont School Dist. v. Governor, supra, 142 N.H. 462,
703 A.2d 1353; Claremont School Dist. v. Governor (1999), 144 N.H. 210, 744 A.2d 1107;
Claremont School Dist. v. Governor (1999), 144 N.H. 590, 761 A.2d 389; Robinson v. Cahill (1973),
62 N.J. 473, 303 A.2d 273; Robinson v. Cahill (1973), 63 N.J. 196, 306 A.2d 65; Robinson v. Cahill
(1975), 67 N.J. 35, 335 A.2d 6; Robinson v. Cahill (1975), 67 N.J. 333, 339 A.2d 193; Robinson v.




                                                56
                                   January Term, 2001




longer than it has been in this state. If there is any attitude among those in this state
that this litigation is best concluded no matter the result, merely for the sake of
moving the case out of our court system, I point out that in those other states,
discomfort with facing this issue has not caused their courts to shirk their task in
the name of expediency.
                                                   I
  DeRolph I and II Highlighted Deficiencies in Previous Enactments That Were
    Inconsistent with a “Thorough and Efficient System of Common Schools”
        {¶ 152} As stated in DeRolph II, 89 Ohio St.3d at 5, 728 N.E.2d at 997:
        “The benchmark of our inquiry remains the Thorough and Efficient Clause,
as set forth in Section 2, Article VI of the Ohio Constitution:
        “ ‘The general assembly shall make such provisions, by taxation, or
otherwise, as, with the income arising from the school trust fund, will secure a
thorough and efficient system of common schools throughout the State * * *.’ ”
        {¶ 153} In DeRolph II, 89 Ohio St.3d at 5-6, 728 N.E.2d at 998, this court
quoted from Justice Francis E. Sweeney, Sr.’s majority opinion in DeRolph I, as
follows:
        “In DeRolph I, 78 Ohio St.3d at 212, 677 N.E.2d at 747, this court identified
four aspects of the school-funding scheme in place at that time that contributed ‘to
the unworkability of the system and which must be eliminated.’ Those four aspects
were ‘(1) the operation of the School Foundation Program, (2) the emphasis of
Ohio’s school-funding system on local property tax, (3) the requirement of school


Cahill (1976), 69 N.J. 449, 355 A.2d 129; Robinson v. Cahill (1976), 70 N.J. 155, 358 A.2d 457;
Robinson v. Cahill (1976), 70 N.J. 464, 360 A.2d 400; Abbott v. Burke (1985), 100 N.J. 269, 495
A.2d 376; Abbott v. Burke, supra, 119 N.J. 287, 575 A.2d 359; Abbott v. Burke (1994), 136 N.J.
444, 643 A.2d 575; Abbott v. Burke (1997), 149 N.J. 145, 693 A.2d 417; Abbott v. Burke (1998),
153 N.J. 480, 710 A.2d 450; Edgewood Indep. School Dist. v. Kirby, supra, 777 S.W.2d 391;
Edgewood Indep. School Dist. v. Kirby (Tex.1991), 804 S.W.2d 491; Carrollton-Farmers Branch
Indep. School Dist. v. Edgewood Indep. School Dist. (Tex.1992), 826 S.W.2d 489; Edgewood Indep.
School Dist. v. Meno (Tex.1995), 917 S.W.2d 717.




                                              57
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




district borrowing through the spending reserve and emergency school assistance
loan programs, and (4) the lack of sufficient funding in the General Assembly’s
biennium budget for the construction and maintenance of public school buildings.’
”
       {¶ 154} This court’s opinion in DeRolph II reviewed the legislation passed
in response to DeRolph I and once again determined that the state’s attempts to
remedy the defects in the system had fallen short. Near the end of the opinion in
DeRolph II, 89 Ohio St.3d at 37, 728 N.E.2d at 1021, this court stated:
       “The following major areas warrant further attention, study, and
development by the General Assembly, but are not by any means the only areas
requiring scrutiny:
       “(1) Continued reliance on local property taxes as a primary means to fund
Ohio’s schools has not been specifically addressed and may in fact be compounded
by H.B. 283’s phase-out of the inventory tax, which may result in even greater
reliance on local contributions in the future. The failure to address this problem
will make it exceedingly difficult for any system of school funding to comply with
the Thorough and Efficient Clause, since the inherent inequities will remain.
       “(2) The basic aid formula has structural deficiencies and may not in fact
reflect the amount required per pupil to provide an adequate education. The phase-
in aspect of the basic aid amount should be reconsidered.
       “(3) Continuing attention must be given to the mechanism implemented to
fund the construction of new school facilities and to repair older, decaying school
buildings, until the task is complete. Additionally, requiring local districts to pass
levies as a prerequisite for obtaining state funding should be reviewed.
       “(4) The School Solvency Assistance Fund established by H.B. 412 must
be reevaluated, so that funds are available and used only in case of extreme
emergencies and not for unfunded mandates or day-to-day expenses.




                                         58
                                  January Term, 2001




        “(5) The unfunded mandates in H.B. 412 and S.B. 55, which will necessitate
either increased reliance on local property taxes or additional borrowing from the
School Solvency Assistance Fund, must be addressed and immediately funded.
        “(6) The phenomenon known as phantom revenue has not been eliminated
and may increase as a consequence of H.B. 650.
        “(7) Strict, statewide academic guidelines must be developed and rigorously
followed throughout all of Ohio’s public school districts.”
        {¶ 155} These points highlighted only some of the key concerns discussed
in DeRolph II that stood in the way of a thorough and efficient system. Tellingly,
many of those same deficiencies had been pointed out as major problems in this
court’s opinion in DeRolph I. These fundamental deficiencies continue to this day.
The state’s contention that it has increased the amount of money for K-12 students
at the expense of every other department in the state budget cannot obscure the truth
of the facts in evidence before us. Although the majority is swayed by the state’s
protestations, actions speak louder than words, and the state’s actions fall well short
of the mark.
                                                II
         Perspectives on Recent Developments and on This Court’s Role in This
                                       Litigation
        {¶ 156} Before debunking the defendants’ claim that the revised system
satisfies the Constitution, it is first necessary to put in perspective the recent history
of our state’s education system. The history of the system from the beginning of
Ohio’s statehood was thoroughly discussed in the majority and concurring opinions
in DeRolph I and DeRolph II and will not be repeated here.
        {¶ 157} The state has undoubtedly made some grudging progress in
addressing a few of the problems that have plagued our state’s system of common
schools. The school-funding system that existed in 1991, when this litigation began
in Perry County Common Pleas Court, was truly in crisis, as numerous problems




                                           59
                               SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




all contributed to a very poor system that was nowhere near being thorough and
efficient. The late 1980s and early 1990s marked the absolute nadir of our statewide
system of schools in Ohio.
        {¶ 158} As detailed in DeRolph I, the system under review in that case was
so disjointed, ineffective, and underfunded that it was a disgrace to the citizens of
Ohio. Numerous school buildings in a depressingly large number of districts were
in deplorable condition. Particularly in our large city school systems and in
southeastern Ohio, it was evident that the state had shirked its responsibility to the
students of the state and had consigned many of them to second-class status. The
system was burdened by so many problems that some of the defendants in DeRolph
I had not at first wanted to appeal the trial court decision that the system was
unconstitutional.
        {¶ 159} By the time DeRolph I reached this court, the General Assembly
had made some unfocused attempts to rectify the most glaring problems. See 78
Ohio St.3d at 211, 677 N.E.2d at 746. After this court’s decision in DeRolph I, the
General Assembly did make further improvements, some of them fairly substantial,
as detailed in DeRolph II, which gave some reason for optimism that significant
improvements might be possible if more time was allotted for the state to devise a
remedy. Based on the evidence before us, it is apparent that the system we review
today is only a minimal improvement.
        {¶ 160} The overriding question (indeed the only question) that we should be
answering is whether the system of schools established by the legislation before us is
a thorough and efficient system. Now, amazingly, the majority has taken upon itself
to do its own toying with the system, has picked out the deficiencies it is willing to
acknowledge, and has declared that with the adjustments it requires the system is
fixed. Yet the sum of the details in evidence yields a single conclusion—the system
we examine today (even as “amended” by the majority) is neither thorough nor
efficient as constitutionally required.




                                          60
                                January Term, 2001




                                               III
    A Failure of Resolve—Lack of Significant Basic Reforms Means That No
Complete Systematic Overhaul Was Accomplished, and the State Has Failed Yet
                    Again to Satisfy the Constitutional Mandate
       {¶ 161} Since DeRolph II was decided, the General Assembly has enacted
four major pieces of new legislation that are most pertinent to our inquiry. They
are 2000 Am.Sub.S.B. No. 272 (“S.B. 272”), 2000 Am.Sub.S.B. No. 345 (“S.B.
345”), 2001 Am.Sub.H.B. No. 94 (“H.B. 94”), and 2001 Am.Sub.S.B. No. 1 (“S.B.
1”). In addition, much of the legislation at issue in DeRolph II remains relevant,
particularly in the areas of school facilities construction and maintenance, but also
in other areas. For instance, the state’s school-funding formula and its underlying
methodology closely resemble the formula before us in DeRolph II. Critical
examination of this legislation, in particular of H.B. 94, reveals that the most recent
reform package assembled by the General Assembly, as further adjusted by the
majority, is disappointingly similar to the school-funding scheme found deficient
in DeRolph II.
                                          A
                       Overreliance on Local Property Taxes
       {¶ 162} This court in both DeRolph I and DeRolph II informed the General
Assembly in no uncertain terms that the system’s overreliance on local property
taxes was the single greatest impediment to a thorough and efficient system: “The
most glaring weakness in the state’s attempts to put in place a thorough and efficient
system of education is the failure to specifically address the overreliance on local
property taxes. If this problem is not rectified, it will be virtually impossible for
the revised school-funding system to be characterized as thorough and efficient.”
DeRolph II, 89 Ohio St.3d at 36, 728 N.E.2d at 1020.
       {¶ 163} Reiterating another of the majority’s observations from DeRolph
II, id. at 8, 728 N.E.2d at 999-1000: “The inherent inequities of funding systems




                                          61
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




that rely too much on local property taxes not only are extremely difficult to rectify,
but also run counter to our Constitution’s explicit requirement for a statewide
system of public schools. The valuation of local property has no connection
whatsoever to the actual education needs of the locality, with the result that a system
overreliant on local property taxes is by its very nature an arbitrary system that can
never be totally thorough or efficient. In a very real sense, this problem underlies
most of the other deficiencies in Ohio’s school system and is either the direct or
indirect cause of them. The majority and all three separate concurring opinions in
DeRolph I specifically recognized the inadequacies of a system that is overreliant
on local property taxes.” (Emphasis sic.)
       {¶ 164} In both DeRolph I and DeRolph II, this court found that the system
was in need of a “complete systematic overhaul.” See DeRolph I, 78 Ohio St.3d at
212, 677 N.E.2d at 747; DeRolph II, 89 Ohio St.3d at 17, 728 N.E.2d at 1006. There
are two essential aspects of the challenge for a “complete systematic overhaul” the
court has now twice issued to the state: the revenue side of the equation and the
expenditure side. As to the revenue side, this court has made clear that local
property taxes can still be a part of the overall revenue system, but they cannot
continue to be the primary means of funding the system. DeRolph v. State (1997),
78 Ohio St.3d 419, 678 N.E.2d 886, 887.
       {¶ 165} After the decision in DeRolph II was announced, the defendants
were faced with some basic choices as to how to reduce overreliance on local
property taxes: they could either institute major reforms to the property tax system,
or they could significantly increase the adequacy level of state funding to education,
or they could undertake some combination of the two approaches.
       {¶ 166} Perhaps the most disappointing feature of this entire case is that,
once again, the state has chosen to totally forgo making any reforms to the property
tax system. Consequently, as in the previous DeRolph opinions, the state has not
specifically addressed this overreliance, instead choosing to deal with it in the




                                          62
                                January Term, 2001




context of revising the expenditure side of the school-funding picture. In essence,
the state has claimed throughout that if it modifies the expenditure side enough, it
has overhauled the system sufficiently to satisfy the Constitution.        The state
contends that the formula and base funding amount it has established ensure
adequacy of funding, and that if a local district chooses to fund above the base
amount of funding ensured by the state, it is free to do so. The state’s view is that
disparities in the property tax on the revenue side of funding can be rectified by
increases in state funding on the expenditure side, so that if adequate per-pupil
funding is provided by the state, then overreliance on local property taxes melts
away.
        {¶ 167} This is so, however, only if the state’s revised plan provides truly
adequate funding to each school district. If adequate funding is not provided, then
the state’s argument that it does not need to specifically address the problems in the
revenue inequities shatters. Unfortunately, the amount of funding provided by the
state under its revised plan (as modified by this court) is seriously inadequate, and
the process of establishing the funding amounts was replete with inconsistencies
and false assumptions.
        {¶ 168} H.B. 94, the biennial budget bill, is the major piece of legislation
that the state claims eliminates overreliance on local property taxes. To that end,
H.B. 94 sets the base cost foundation level at $4,814 in FY02 and at $4,949 in
FY03. R.C. 3317.012(A). (Under the statutes at issue in DeRolph II, the base
amount was set to be $4,414 for FY02 and $4,538 for FY03. See former R.C.
3317.012[A], 1998 Am.Sub.H.B. No. 650, 147 Ohio Laws, Part III, 5138.) The
majority orders an increase in the base funding amount above H.B. 94’s provisions,
but the majority’s revised amount is simply not enough to make the difference
needed to truly eliminate overreliance on local property taxes.
        {¶ 169} It is important to keep in mind a central point about the base funding
amount. It is simply an amount the state has established to reflect the supposed per-




                                         63
                              SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




pupil cost of a basic education. The state does not fully fund this amount for each
student. In fact, in terms of total funding of the base cost amount, a large percentage
is provided locally. For those districts fortunate enough to have the ability to generate
a large amount of money locally, the state pays very little of the base amount.
        {¶ 170} H.B. 94 also introduces the concept of “parity aid” to be phased in to
provide further money to low-wealth districts (R.C. 3317.0217[C]). The majority
orders that the phase-in of parity aid be moved up from FY06 to FY04, but, again, the
increase provided by that amount is not enough to truly make the needed difference.
Under H.B. 94’s plan, parity aid, which is approximately $100 million for FY02, is to
increase about $100 million per year as it is phased in, with it set to be approximately
$500 million for FY06 when fully phased in. See R.C. 3317.0217(C)(1); H.B. No.
94, Section 44, line item 200-525. The majority’s order to move up the date of full
phase-in appears to have no effect on funding for FY02 and FY03, and will therefore
have an effect only in FY04 and FY05. The parity aid amount thus becomes
approximately $500 million for FY04 (rather than the approximately $300 million
under H.B. 94) and approximately $500 million for FY05 (rather than the
approximately $400 million scheduled under H.B. 94). The majority’s ordered
adjustment of parity aid thus adds a total of about $300 million more to the total
funding package than what would have been provided under the plan covering FY02
to FY07 as detailed in H.B. 94. It is not clear what the majority’s order in this regard
does to equity aid, which was slated to be phased out by FY06 as parity aid was phased
in under the H.B. 94 plan. R.C. 3317.0213(A)(7) and (B).
        {¶ 171} H.B. 94 also limits the amounts any district has to pay for special
education, vocational education, and transportation, so that the state picks up more
of those costs for some districts (R.C. 3317.022[F]); and expands “gap aid” from
the state to try to deal with phantom revenue (R.C. 3317.0216[C]). None of these
provisions is really directly targeted to reduce overreliance on local property
taxes—all are actually directed at other deficiencies pointed out in DeRolph II.




                                           64
                                January Term, 2001




       {¶ 172} This argument that the state had dealt with overreliance simply by
increasing funding was soundly rejected in DeRolph II, 89 Ohio St.3d at 28, 728
N.E.2d at 1015: “The state’s failure to specifically address the school-funding
system’s overreliance on local property taxes is of paramount concern as we
evaluate the state’s attempts to craft a thorough and efficient system of funding.
The state’s argument that it can minimize this problem by addressing the other
aspects identified in DeRolph I as contributing to the unworkability of the system
in place at that time, see 78 Ohio St.3d at 212, 677 N.E.2d at 747, is unconvincing.
We see no indication that anything significant has been done to remove this primary
impediment, which was the major factor in the previous funding system found
unconstitutional in DeRolph I. No further effort at specifically addressing this
overreliance on property taxes has been made since the voters of the state rejected
the one-cent sales tax increase on the May 5, 1998 ballot. The problem of
overreliance on local property taxes must be independently addressed, and all
potential solutions to this problem must be explored. The inequities inherent in a
system that relies too heavily on local property taxes will remain until this problem
is resolved by the General Assembly.” (Emphasis sic.)
       {¶ 173} Further, this area of concern was the most strongly criticized in both
DeRolph I and DeRolph II, and again is the overriding weakness of the state’s
response now. See DeRolph II, 89 Ohio St.3d at 26-27, 728 N.E.2d at 1013-1014:
       “Overreliance on local property taxes was one of the factors that rendered
the school-funding scheme deficient [in DeRolph I], yet this aspect of the former
system persists in the state’s current funding plan, wholly unchanged. The system’s
dependence on local property taxes has resulted in vast disparities among Ohio’s
six hundred eleven public school districts due to the differences in revenue
generated by each. * * *
       “The state would like this court to believe that overreliance on local
property taxes will dissipate once the new measures are fully phased in, so that the




                                         65
                              SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




only reason a district would have to look to local property taxes would be that the
district wants to fund beyond adequacy. Unfortunately, the reality of the situation
at this time appears to be otherwise.” (Emphasis sic.)
        {¶ 174} The state simply has not made the “complete systematic overhaul”
of the funding system that this court has called for. This court could not have been
clearer than in DeRolph II and in DeRolph I that overreliance had to be
independently addressed. Yet, once again, it has not been. While the “adjustments”
imposed by the majority do increase somewhat the total state education spending
package above the H.B. 94 level, those adjustments do nothing to rectify the
inherent disparities.
                                           B
                             A Lack of Adequate Funding
        {¶ 175} Given that the state has chosen not to reform the property tax
system, the related question is whether the state has adequately funded the system
it has chosen to put in place. It is apparent that the state had no intention of actually
establishing an adequate amount of state-provided funding, but instead tried to do
the minimum amount it could, always with an eye to reducing spending whenever
possible, in order to try to satisfy this court, rather than trying to legitimately mount
an effort that complied with our Constitution. The result was a series of political
bargains that established the state spending amount on education at a level the state
felt it could get by on without cutting other programs too much and without raising
significantly more revenue, and that had little, if any, relationship to the cost of an
adequate education. The majority partakes of the same approach—ordering more
funding (but not too much more), according to its own opinion of what the state
budget can tolerate.
        {¶ 176} The General Assembly, rather than exploring all potential solutions
(see DeRolph II, 89 Ohio St.3d at 28, 728 N.E.2d at 1015) as it sought to revamp
the system after DeRolph II was announced, seems to have operated under a two-




                                           66
                                 January Term, 2001




pronged plan. The first was to delay doing anything meaningful in response to
DeRolph II until after the November 2000 election, in the hopes that the makeup of
this court might change so that no response would be necessary. When the makeup
of this court did not change, the General Assembly then realized that some type of
action would be required, and so hastily assembled a perfunctory response when it
became clear that the problem would not simply go away.
        {¶ 177} There are essentially two failures in the state’s unsatisfactory
response. One is that state funding per student under the basic aid formula is
inadequate, and the other is that state funding for construction and repair of school
facilities is not only inadequate, but also inefficient. If the state wants to repeat its
argument in DeRolph II that it has achieved adequacy in funding (and that
overreliance on property taxes has been eliminated thereby), it has to do much more
than it has done and must fund at a significantly greater level.
        {¶ 178} There are many forces at work that put revenue pressure on local
school districts, and the state has not acted to dispel those pressures.            Two
immediate examples that come to mind are the 1976 H.B. 920 tax-reduction factors,
136 Ohio Laws, Part II, 3182, discussed in DeRolph I, 78 Ohio St.3d at 201, 677
N.E.2d at 739, which prevent a school district from realizing additional revenue
even though local property increases in valuation, and the inventory tax phase-out
of 1999 H.B. 283 discussed in DeRolph II, 89 Ohio St.3d at 27-28, 728 N.E.2d at
993, which reduces local revenue for some districts. Another area where the state
has not acted concerns the tax breaks that the state and local governments are
affording businesses throughout this state. A July 2001 Wall Street Journal article
about business tax abatements and their effect on the Toledo Public School District
points out that Toledo-area businesses complain about the “abysmal academic
record” of the district, which they claim “hampers efforts to hire well-trained
workers and attract new employers.”          Wall Street Journal (July 18), at A1.
However, the article details that, ironically, “even as they call for reform,




                                           67
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




companies are receiving hefty breaks from the very taxes that would help pay for
it. Since the late 1970s, tens of millions of dollars that would have otherwise flowed
into Toledo school coffers have instead gone to businesses as tax abatements.”
While local business executives defend the abatements as a benefit to the
community as a whole, there is no doubt that the abatements are a serious and
sometimes overwhelming burden to local school districts.
       {¶ 179} The Wall Street Journal article points out that Ohio is not the only
state where school district revenue is being significantly reduced through tax
abatements and that “Toledo is hardly alone.” In other states, too, the problem is
prevalent:
       “[A large corporation] is seeking a two-thirds reduction in the assessed value
of a big appliance plant in Louisville, Ky., where school officials estimate that the
resulting loss of tax revenue would be enough to pay the annual salaries of as many
as 10 teachers. [Another company] recently sought $1 billion in reduced assessments
on three San Jose, Calif., properties, although a local school district warned of
financial havoc, and the company’s bid failed. Meanwhile, Memphis-area businesses
have now received so many tax abatements that school officials in surrounding Shelby
County talk of eliminating high school athletics.”
       {¶ 180} The General Assembly has done little to rectify problems caused by
tax abatements and related revenue losses. In a system characterized by inadequate
funding, local districts have great difficulty in generating additional local money to
replace the money they have lost. These considerations help illustrate why, if state
funding is not adequate, the system cannot be thorough and efficient.




                                          68
                                 January Term, 2001




                                               IV
                            The Details of an Inadequate Response
                                               A
                                   The Basic Aid Formula
         {¶ 181} It is evident that, as in DeRolph II, under the legislation we review
“[t]he basic aid formula has structural deficiencies” and does not “in fact reflect the
amount required per pupil to provide an adequate education.” See 89 Ohio St.3d at
37, 728 N.E.2d at 1021. Once again, the basic aid formula reflects a series of
compromises, characterized by giving with one hand and taking away with the other,
and not by a serious attempt to deal forthrightly with the problems highlighted by this
court.
         {¶ 182} The type of “residual budgeting” identified by this court in
DeRolph I was blatant. During the late 1980s and early 1990s, the General
Assembly simply funded all other departments first, and then funded education with
what was left, with no regard to what the cost to fund education actually should
have been. See DeRolph I, 78 Ohio St.3d at 261, 677 N.E.2d at 780 (Resnick, J.,
concurring). The major deficiency of that approach was that no attempt was made
to determine the cost of, and then to fund, an adequate education. As we recognized
in DeRolph II, 89 Ohio St.3d at 19-20, 728 N.E.2d at 1008, this type of overt
residual budgeting appears to have been eliminated. Within its recent budgets the
state has not employed this practice, which was blatantly at odds with the Thorough
and Efficient Clause of our Constitution.
         {¶ 183} However, a new variant of the same phenomenon (“cost-based
budgeting”) appears now to be the dominant factor in the state budget process, in
which the state determines first how much it wishes to spend on education and then
backs out from that number to produce a formula that calls for spending that
amount. This approach suspiciously resembles residual budgeting and also stands
in the way of a thorough and efficient system by not placing sufficient priority on




                                          69
                               SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




education in the state budget. Even more evident in this case than in DeRolph II,
the “actual cost” was “the deciding factor in selecting the method used to determine
the base cost of an adequate education.” See DeRolph II, 89 Ohio St.3d at 20, 728
N.E.2d at 1008.
        {¶ 184} As mentioned above, the state, in H.B. 94, has set the base cost
foundation level at $4,814 in FY02 and at $4,949 in FY03, an increase of $400 over
what it had been scheduled to be in FY02 under the former formula, and an even
larger increase for FY03. See R.C. 3317.012(A). To do this, the state used the
expenditures of one hundred twenty-seven “high-performing districts” as the model
in its new formula to set the base amount. See R.C. 3317.012(B). It is obvious that
most of those one hundred twenty-seven districts cannot in reality be termed
successful. A system built on such a model is inherently flawed. It appears that
every time the state adjusted its sample group (for example by eliminating the top
five percent of districts from consideration by applying “wealth screens”), the base
amount was lowered, thus making the final result more and more suspect.
        {¶ 185} The overall process engaged in by the state could be interpreted to be
“residual budgeting,” in that it appears that the state arbitrarily introduced factors into
its determination of the base amount with the underlying intention of reducing the
amount as much as it thought it could justify to this court. The majority appears to
recognize that the base amount was artificially lowered, and so picks out its own
solution to that specific problem—modifying the H.B. 94 approach to judicially
legislate a compromise for the parties.
        {¶ 186} Another significant concern is that the state reduced the range of
the cost-of-doing-business factor of the formula in H.B. 94 and therefore reduced
the amount that many school districts otherwise would have received. See R.C.
3317.02(N). This is important because the cost-of-doing-business factor is a
multiplier that is applied to adjust the base amount to increase funding within the




                                            70
                                January Term, 2001




formula, and a reduction in the cost-of-doing-business factor can blunt the
effectiveness of an increase in the base amount for many school districts.
       {¶ 187} To the state’s credit, H.B. 94’s $400 increase in the base amount
for FY02 over what it would have been under H.B. 650 is meaningful, especially
considering that the state has eliminated the phase-in criticized in DeRolph II.
Moreover, the majority has ordered an increase above that amount. However, the
majority’s action in this regard underscores the fact that the H.B. 94 amount is
insufficient. In addition, it is evident that other adjustments within the overall
funding scheme (such as the reduction in the range of the cost-of-doing-business
factor) dilute the effect of the increase in some districts. Much more must be done
before the state can prove that the amount it provides under H.B. 94, as augmented
by the majority, in reality will afford the benefits of a thorough and efficient system
to each and every student.
       {¶ 188} H.B. 94’s establishment of the cost of a basic education is
predicated on methodology devised by Dr. John G. Augenblick, who also devised
the methodology behind the H.B. 650 system at issue in DeRolph II.                The
fundamentals of this approach are detailed in DeRolph II, 89 Ohio St.3d at 17-18,
728 N.E.2d at 1006-1007, and in many ways the current methodology is similar to
what was at issue in DeRolph II.
       {¶ 189} The so-called Augenblick method used in H.B. 94 for establishing
basic state aid is credible on its face, but below the surface, significant problems
lurk. Some of those problems are with Augenblick’s methodology itself, and some
are due to the state’s further manipulation of that methodology. While the system
in place in DeRolph II was based on model school districts meeting seventeen of
eighteen performance standards under the former system of rating schools (see 89
Ohio St.3d at 17, 728 N.E.2d at 1007), the current H.B. 94 system is based on
schools that met only twenty of twenty-seven performance standards (and even
includes some school districts whose scores the state rounded upward to reach the




                                          71
                              SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




twenty-standards level even though those schools did not actually meet that level),
with many of the top-performing districts eliminated from consideration due to the
imposition of wealth screens. See R.C. 3317.012(B). There is undeniably a
correlation between a school district’s wealth and its level of student achievement,
although the state’s overall plan seems to deny that correlation in setting forth what
the state considers an adequate base amount of funding.
        {¶ 190} In the year on which data to determine the base amount is based,
former R.C. 3302.03(B)(1) would have required a school district to achieve at least
twenty-six of the twenty-seven standards to be rated effective, if there had been
twenty-seven standards. 1999 Am.Sub.H.B. No. 282. After the wealth screens were
applied, only ten school districts out of the one hundred twenty-seven that remained
in the sample would have been rated effective. As another part of this process, the
state used the lower of either 1996 spending (with a 2.8 percent per year inflation
adjustment) or 1999 spending for those districts that were model school districts under
both current and former law, to adjust for an alleged “echo effect.” See R.C.
3317.012(B), last paragraph. This was a highly questionable practice that further
allowed the state to lower the base cost formula amount.
        {¶ 191} The majority, recognizing that the H.B. 94 approach is fraught with
deficiencies, eliminates some of the less defensible aspects of that plan with the stroke
of a pen.    However, just because the majority orders that some of the most
questionable features be removed from the calculations does not change the fact that
many of the districts that remain in the base amount calculation as approved by the
majority were not truly model districts. Of the one hundred twenty-seven model
districts in the H.B. 94 plan, only 8.5 percent offer all-day, everyday kindergarten for
all students and less than fifty percent of the districts offer three foreign language
courses for high school students. In addition, gifted students are not being adequately
served in most of these districts, and many of the districts have one or more school
buildings that have major problems. The state’s failure to evaluate the inputs of these




                                           72
                                 January Term, 2001




model districts will be discussed later in this opinion. In failing to take inputs into
account at any step of the state’s response to the school-funding problem, the state has
missed an ideal opportunity to construct a constitutional system.
       {¶ 192} The 2.8 percent inflation factor in the base cost foundation formula
from fiscal year to fiscal year (R.C. 3317.012[A][1]) is unjustified according to
evidence that school costs rise faster than the general inflation rate. One study
estimates inflation for school costs to be more than 3.6 percent per year. Furthermore,
as will be discussed below, the unfunded mandates the General Assembly seems intent
on imposing in much of its legislation tend to increase local costs each year by an even
greater amount. This portends that the H.B. 94 plan’s basic aid amounts, even as
increased by the majority, will be more and more inadequate as we move forward in
the six-year period covered by H.B. 94.
       {¶ 193} Appellees claim that, in addition to the base amount being too low,
the categorical adjustments to the base amount are all underfunded. It is obvious
that a thorough and efficient system should provide adequate funding for
categoricals such as Disadvantaged Pupil Impact Aid (“DPIA”), special education,
vocational education, transportation, and gifted education. However, H.B. 94
actually decreases DPIA funding for the biennium it covers. See H.B. 94, Section
44, line item 200-520, $360,149,243; cf. 1999 Am.Sub.H.B. No. 282, Section 4,
line item 200-520, $390,708,953. That raises questions, when our large city schools
have so many problems and so many DPIA students reside within the districts that
have the most trouble meeting state standards. I agree with appellees that the state
should undertake a major study to determine more accurately the actual costs of
educating disadvantaged pupils in both inner cities and poor rural areas. It is also
evident that, just as in DeRolph II, most of these categories remain underfunded. It
is highly suspicious that a recurring consequence of the state’s plan is that within
each individual aspect of the system, money seems to be shifted away from our
large city districts that most need it, with the smallest increases in each facet of the




                                          73
                              SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




plan (when there are increases) allocated to the large city districts. The majority’s
selective decision to legislate increases in state funding does nothing to address the
very real problems caused by the underfunding of categoricals.
        {¶ 194} The state’s claim that it is providing a $1.4 billion increase for the
biennium covered by H.B. 94 is a fiction. As Warren G. Russell’s affidavit
illustrates, the state does three things to arrive at that amount: (1) replaces money
eliminated or otherwise reduced within H.B. 94, (2) replaces funds formerly
provided from state money with federal money, and (3) reallocates funds formerly
included in the foundation formula that were eliminated or reduced within H.B. 94.
For example, some of that “increase” is attributable to funds that are merely meant
to replace local revenue that will be lost through reduction in local taxation of
public utilities. Furthermore, it is the state’s method of reallocation that is the most
questionable. H.B. 94’s supposed $400 increase in the formula amount for FY02
is actually much less than the numbers seem to indicate, given that much of that
money comes from lowering amounts for categorical spending and moving that
money into the base amount.
        {¶ 195} As much as anything, this reallocation indicates the manipulations
that are inherent in the system before us. The state claims it is increasing the base
amount by $400 in FY02. However, by decreasing the range of the cost-of-doing-
business factor, by reducing DPIA funding, by allowing unfunded mandates to
continue, by phasing out the local inventory tax, and by numerous other machinations,
the state has created numbers that are highly suspect. The majority’s decision to order
an increase in the base amount, while augmenting the H.B. 94 figures, does not render
the state’s numbers any more reliable, only more suspect.
        {¶ 196} Recognizing that school funding can overwhelm a budget, and that
we are discussing extremely large amounts of money, I acknowledge that problems
in our system of schools cannot be quickly corrected. The problems encountered
involve enough of the state budget that the task appears to be insurmountable, but




                                          74
                                 January Term, 2001




with insight and time the problems are solvable. As the evidence in this case
conclusively indicates, for a variety of reasons the costs of educating our children
continue to increase well above the general inflation rate.             However, the
Constitution does not make the Thorough and Efficient Clause conditional. We
must never lose sight of the importance of this case on the futures of the children
of this state, and indeed on the future of the entire state.
                                           B
                                  Other Deficiencies
        {¶ 197} Apart from the overriding flaws of the basic aid formula, there are
many other deficiencies in the system. The state has used a Band-Aid approach
instead of the major surgery that was required to correct these problems.
                                           1
                              School District Borrowing
        {¶ 198} While 2000 Am.Sub.S.B. No. 345 (effective April 10, 2001), the
state’s response to forced borrowing concerns expressed in DeRolph II, has
somewhat eased the forced borrowing provisions of prior law, it certainly does not
eliminate them entirely. The General Assembly seems to believe that if it does not
have some type of forced borrowing provision, it will have to give undeserved
money to poorly administered districts, and the threat of forced borrowing is one of
the motivations it uses to compel districts to be fiscally prudent. This is an example
of the distrust of local school districts the state has repeatedly exhibited in enacting
legislation to try to remedy school-funding problems. This distrust was also evident
in much of the legislation at issue in DeRolph II, especially in the mandates heaped
upon local districts by 1997 H.B. 412 and 1997 S.B. 55.
        {¶ 199} All in all, the Solvency Assistance Program Fund remains
essentially unchanged from what it was in DeRolph II, despite this court’s
admonition in that case that “[e]xcept in extreme cases, reliance on loans must be
eradicated, and loans certainly must not be employed as a method to meet school




                                           75
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




districts’ daily operational expenses.” DeRolph II, 89 Ohio St.3d at 26, 728 N.E.2d
at 1013. So long as the state continues to underfund education, forced borrowing
will continue to be an entrenched component of the system.
                                          2
                                Unfunded Mandates
       {¶ 200} In DeRolph II, this court pointed out why the problem of unfunded
mandates came to a head after DeRolph I was decided:
       “Both S.B. 55 and H.B. 412 were proceeding through the General Assembly
at the same time as the proposed sales tax increase. On February 17, 1998, the Ohio
Senate approved H.B. 697, which placed the one-cent sales tax increase on the May
5, 1998 ballot for voter approval. The one-cent sales tax increase, which appeared on
the May 5 ballot as Issue 2, was not approved by voters. Consequently, school
districts are required to adhere to the bills’ additional requirements and standards of
accountability, but the anticipated funding must now come from a different source.
       “Since these mandates are essentially unfunded, a paramount concern is that
H.B. 412 and S.B. 55 will impose additional costs on school districts.” DeRolph
II, 89 Ohio St.3d at 33, 728 N.E.2d at 1018.
       {¶ 201} The record before us clearly confirms that, as we anticipated in
DeRolph II, there were large additional costs imposed by these and other unfunded
mandates. Id. at 32, 728 N.E.2d at 1018. Enacted in 2000, Am.Sub.S.B. No. 345
(see above, under borrowing) is also the state’s response to the concern that
increased accountability measures have led to too many unfunded mandates. In the
accountability portion of S.B. 345, the state has eliminated the budget reserve
requirement (rainy day fund) (R.C. 5705.29[H], repealed) and has decreased the
amount a district has to put into both its textbook and instructional materials fund
(R.C. 3315.17[A]) and its capital and maintenance fund (R.C. 3317.18[A]). The
court in DeRolph II ordered the state to “immediately” fund the mandates (see 89
Ohio St.3d at 37, 728 N.E.2d at 1021). (This bill was not signed by the Governor




                                          76
                                January Term, 2001




until January 9, 2001, nearly eight months after DeRolph II was decided. That is
quite a long time to be considered immediate.) But, rather than funding anything,
including past mandates that had never been funded, the state simply eliminated
some of the mandates.
        {¶ 202} Despite the state’s arguments to the contrary, many unfunded
mandates, both new and old, still exist. Further, it is predictable that many of the
academic standards of S.B. 1 will essentially be unfunded mandates at some point
for local school districts.
        {¶ 203} It is apparent that, under the state’s current education plan, there
may be no statewide tax increases, but there will be many tax increases on the local
level as more and more levies will, of necessity, be on the ballot. Since the state
plan, as “adjusted” by this court, will not provide adequate funding to many local
districts to cover their costs, more funds will have to be raised locally.
        {¶ 204} A Legislative Service Commission staff member in the Legislative
Budget Office estimated that unfunded mandates totaling $515 million per year
were imposed by the General Assembly in 1997 H.B. 412 and 1997 S.B. 55. The
staff member’s report was initially withheld from the General Assembly by the
Director of the Legislative Service Commission on the grounds that it was of
questionable quality. Eventually, a draft of the report was made available to some
members of the General Assembly, after several requests were made in May 2001.
This report, required by R.C. 103.141 to be submitted in October 2000, was not
released in time for the deliberations over S.B. 345 and would certainly have been
relevant, given that a significant portion of S.B. 345 made adjustments to those
mandates. Furthermore, although the draft report was made available to members
of the General Assembly in the later stages of the discussion regarding H.B. 94, it
was obviously ignored in the process of enacting that legislation. The state’s failure
to address the contents of this report in any of the legislation we review and the
possible irregularities indicated by the circumstances of failing to release the report




                                          77
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




to all members of the General Assembly in a timely manner raise serious questions
about the state’s commitment to funding these mandates.
                                              3
                                    Phantom Revenue
       {¶ 205} H.B. 94 takes some steps to reduce phantom revenue by expanding
gap aid (R.C. 3317.0216) and tries to adjust the formula so that it no longer assumes
that more local money is raised than actually is realized. However, it does not do
enough, and H.B. 94 still does not eliminate all types of phantom revenue.
       {¶ 206} Phantom revenue remains a serious concern. As we stated in
DeRolph II: “Requiring school districts to seek additional tax increases to make up
for lost revenue is something that should be avoided, especially in view of our
holding in DeRolph I, which required overreliance on local property taxes to be
eliminated. The Achieve, Inc. report quoted one school superintendent who stated,
‘I spend every third year running a political campaign, not running my school
district.’ This is not how a thorough and efficient system should function and
further serves to emphasize why heavy reliance on local property taxes must end.”
89 Ohio St.3d at 30-31, 728 N.E.2d at 1016.
       {¶ 207} Again, since the state does not guarantee adequate funding for
many districts, local levies beyond twenty-three mills will have to cover the
deficiencies.
                                         4
                 Development of Statewide Academic Standards
       {¶ 208} Am.Sub.S.B. No. 1, signed by the Governor on June 12, 2001, the
Education Standards Bill, implements the recommendations of the Governor’s
Commission for Student Success. S.B. 1 requires the State Board of Education to
adopt statewide academic standards for each grade in selected subjects and to adopt
a model curriculum. R.C. 3301.079. S.B. 1 phases out the current proficiency tests
(R.C. 3301.0712), replaces them with achievement tests (R.C. 3301.0710), and




                                         78
                                January Term, 2001




requires that the new achievement tests be aligned with the academic standards and
model curricula (R.C. 3301.0710[A]). S.B. 1 revamps the system of school district
report cards under new standards to be developed by the State Board of Education.
R.C. 3302.02 and 3302.03. The provisions of this bill are so new that its effect
remains to be seen. It directs the State Department of Education to set up the details
of the plan but does not provide the specifics. Since one of the major themes of
DeRolph II was that strict academic standards must be set and linked to assessment
standards, 89 Ohio St.3d at 37, 728 N.E.2d at 1021, this bill is a first step in that
direction.   However, it is questionable whether these measures have been
adequately funded in H.B. 94 or elsewhere, raising skepticism that solid standards
will be able to be developed and thoroughly implemented.
       {¶ 209} The Achieve, Inc. report quoted in DeRolph II recognized that the
lack of standards was a significant deficiency in Ohio’s system. The report pointed
out that “ ‘[s]trictly speaking, Ohio does not really have statewide academic
standards, at least as that term is used in most other states. The absence of standards
is particularly troublesome * * *.’ ” (Emphasis added.) DeRolph II, 89 Ohio St.3d at
33-34, 728 N.E.2d at 1019.
       {¶ 210} Putting these statewide standards in place, S.B. 1 (as H.B. 94 did in
determining the base funding amount) fails to use inputs at any point in the process.
Instead, both bills are totally concerned with outputs.
       {¶ 211} It is prudent to use outputs as a part of determining the formula, but
it is clear that, at least in some way, inputs should have played a role in the system.
A combination of both inputs and outputs would have ameliorated the concerns
discussed above regarding the fact that many of the one hundred twenty-seven
districts employed to set the base funding amount in H.B. 94 were not appropriate
to serve as models. Inputs have been ignored in the formula, but they should have
been considered in order to overcome this fundamental problem with the outputs-
only approach.




                                          79
                              SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




        {¶ 212} At a minimum, inputs that should be measured to determine a base
amount include maximum class sizes; specific curriculum opportunities at all grade
levels for all students, including advanced placement courses for high school
students and foreign language opportunities in elementary schools; replacement
cycles for textbooks; professional development time for all teachers; classroom
materials and equipment such as computers, televisions, and VCRs; and other
necessities for a thorough and efficient system.
        {¶ 213} The Achieve, Inc. report quoted in DeRolph II noted that it was
essential that all parties work together to fix the funding problem and invest in
strengthening the capacity of Ohio’s educators to teach at higher standards. See 89
Ohio St.3d at 37-38, 728 N.E.2d at 1022. The Achieve, Inc. report also proposed that
“Ohio must mount a substantial, sustained, statewide program to equip its
administrators and teachers with the skills and support they will need to substantially
improve student performance.” Obviously, the authors of the Achieve, Inc. report
recognized that inputs must play a role in determining adequate funding, as well as in
setting statewide standards. Yet H.B. 94 (funding) and S.B. 1 (setting academic
standards) both totally ignore inputs. Just as the state failed to undertake any reform
on the income side to solve the problem of overreliance on property tax, the state also
failed to incorporate any input standards into S.B. 1 relating to academic
accountability. However, if inputs are not worked into the accountability process,
how can the internal efficiency of school districts be compared? If input standards are
ignored, then accountability cannot be fairly implemented.           Output goals and
standards have little meaning if inputs are inconsistent among individual local
districts. If a particular district fails to improve in meeting the output standards, the
lack of firm input standards may be a key reason. But if inputs are not standardized
statewide, then the required correlation is lacking. I see no indication in the record
before us, or in any of the pertinent legislation including S.B. 1, that any meaningful
attempt to address the lack of inputs in the system was ever mounted.




                                           80
                                 January Term, 2001




                                               5
                      School Construction and Facilities Maintenance
       {¶ 214} In DeRolph II, this court quoted from the Achieve, Inc. report
relative to school facilities:    “ ‘[D]espite significant recent investments the
challenge remains severe. Although estimates differ on the magnitude of the
problem, by all accounts too many Ohio children, especially in poor rural and
urban districts, attend classes in dreadfully sub-standard facilities. [Emphasis sic.]
* * * During this decade the state has invested over $1 billion in capital
improvement funds for schools, more than tripling the investments made over the
previous four decades.       However, without a reliable inventory of the state’s
facilities and a solid cost estimate for bringing all Ohio school[s] up to standard, it
is impossible to know just how much progress has been made. While the state has
at least made a down payment on a long deferred problem, this is a major piece of
unfinished business for Ohio’s policymakers.’ (Emphasis added.)” 89 Ohio St.3d
at 22, 728 N.E.2d at 1010.
       {¶ 215} This court also remarked in DeRolph II, id. at 24, 728 N.E.2d at
1011-1012: “The task at hand is not one to be taken lightly. One-half of Ohio’s
school buildings are fifty years old or older. DeRolph I, 78 Ohio St.3d at 206, 677
N.E.2d at 742. Constructing and maintaining school buildings is an ongoing
process, and this court recognizes that it would be unreasonable to require the
General Assembly to remedy overnight what has taken decades of neglect to
develop, yet there remains an extensive amount of work to be done in order to
educate Ohio’s students in ‘safe and healthy learning’ environments. Id. at 208,
677 N.E.2d at 744. Continuing funding in this area is of the utmost importance.”
       {¶ 216} Am.Sub.S.B. No. 272 (effective Sept. 14, 2000) is the sole new
enactment since DeRolph II dealing with school construction and maintenance. It
continues on the path that was set out in the statutes at issue in DeRolph II. Given
the previous sorry state of neglect and the massive amount of money needed, it may




                                          81
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




be impossible for the state to make great headway on this problem for years to
come. However, while the state’s programs have at least corrected the worst
problems in the worst buildings, they are merely treading water in addressing many
other facility problems.
       {¶ 217} The state has still not done a comprehensive statewide study on
facilities needs and should be faulted for not doing so. Ohio needs an immediate
complete facilities assessment for all school buildings, not the watered-down
version approved by the majority.         The state’s failure to conduct such a
comprehensive study raises the suspicion that the state fears what the study would
reveal. Statewide facilities needs, which were found to be $10.2 billion in a 1990
study and were estimated to be $16.5 billion in 1997, see DeRolph II, 89 Ohio St.3d
at 20, 728 N.E.2d at 1009, have certainly increased in 2001 beyond those figures,
which may have been quite conservative, despite the recent influx of state money.
Although the state is supposedly operating under a twelve-year plan to rebuild
Ohio’s schools (see DeRolph II, id. at 23, 728 N.E.2d at 1011), it is clear that the
problems with facilities funding for construction and maintenance will take much
longer than that to resolve with the methods presently being employed by the state.
       {¶ 218} In addition to simply failing to do enough soon enough, the state’s
plan for providing the construction money to local districts is marked by
inefficiencies, bureaucratic red tape, and politics. As a result, much of the money
that supposedly is available cannot be used by deserving districts. Most of the
state’s building programs rely on the passage of a local levy as a condition for a
local district to receive state money. Once again, thoroughness and efficiency are
conspicuously lacking.
       {¶ 219} One recent development with significant potential is that the state
has enhanced its ability to issue bonds to pay part of the state share of the costs of
local projects. In DeRolph II, 89 Ohio St.3d at 14, 728 N.E.2d at 1004, this court
noted that Senate Joint Resolution No. 1 placed on the November 2, 1999 ballot a




                                         82
                                 January Term, 2001




proposal, approved by Ohio voters, to amend the Ohio Constitution “to allow the
state to issue general obligation bonds to pay for school facilities.” See, principally,
Section 2n, Article VIII, Ohio Constitution; see, also, 1997 Am.Sub.S.B. No. 102,
Section 8, 147 Ohio Laws, Part IV, 7417. The deposition of Randall A. Fischer,
executive director of the Ohio School Facilities Commission, reveals that these
bonds are being issued. However, it is unclear from the record before us how
effectively the bonds are being utilized and whether the state has fully taken
advantage of the opportunities presented by bond issuance. Our state could benefit
greatly if our legislators were able to exercise additional vision to put in place plans
that would make bonds a more efficacious method of paying for school facilities.
                                           V
                                     Conclusion
        {¶ 220} The foregoing discussion of the deficiencies in the state’s “reform”
package does not mention every inadequacy in the plan and touches only on some
that could be developed in detail. It is my intent merely to expose the most glaring
examples of the many failings within the state’s plan. It is difficult to comprehend
how the majority can, for the most part, uphold a plan with so many obstacles to
thoroughness and efficiency. Purely political motives seem to be the driving force
behind the majority’s decision. As one justice concedes in a concurring opinion,
she votes with the majority only to facilitate a “pragmatic compromise” that will
break an impasse she considers unacceptable, even though her views on the merits
have not changed.
        {¶ 221} If a majority of this court had found, as I believe we should, that the
Constitution still has not been satisfied, this court would have had to face the
extremely difficult issue of what action to take. Perhaps an unwillingness to confront
this issue was a further motivation for the majority to generally accept the state’s
arguments, buttressed by the majority’s decision to modify the legislation by judicial
fiat to render it slightly less unacceptable, and to rely on the “good faith” of the




                                          83
                              SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




General Assembly to comply with this court’s amendments. This court has in the past
resisted the calls of those who asked for a special master, who asked for findings of
contempt against the Governor and members of the General Assembly, who asked
that we enjoin funding of schools until a thorough and efficient system is devised, and
who asked that we ourselves explicitly order funding at a specified level. I continue
to adhere to the view that those remedies are not acceptable courses of action. Added
to that list of possible remedies, the plaintiffs now urge that we should find all of H.B.
94 unconstitutional and therefore reject in toto the state biennial budget bill.
        {¶ 222} Any intrusion by this court into the legislative prerogative is not a
step that should be taken lightly. As we stated in DeRolph I, 78 Ohio St.3d at 213,
677 N.E.2d at 747, fn. 9: “[W]e recognize that the proper scope of our review is
limited to determining whether the current system meets constitutional muster. We
refuse to encroach upon the clearly legislative function of deciding what the new
legislation will be.” See, also, DeRolph II, 89 Ohio St.3d at 12, 728 N.E.2d at 1003
(“Our role, as we have declared in past cases, is to decide issues of
constitutionality—not to legislate”).
        {¶ 223} The majority, in an effort to terminate this litigation, turns its back on
those standards, and undertakes to do some legislating of its own, apparently on the
theory that the end justifies the means. The majority increases the amount being spent
by the state on our schools in an effort to placate those who believe that not enough
has been done.
        {¶ 224} I have serious objections to this intrusion by a majority of this court
into the province of the legislature. The majority’s additions to the legislative plan
are tantamount to judicial legislation, and represent usurpation by the court of
legislative power.
        {¶ 225} The majority cites no precedents for its view that, in uniting to
assemble a consensus, it has the authority to order the General Assembly to enact
specific legislation that will make the school-funding system satisfactory to a




                                           84
                                  January Term, 2001




majority of this court. It is obvious why no precedents are cited—there are none
available that come anywhere close to justifying the majority’s position. By going
to such great lengths to terminate this case, the majority is taking an unprecedented
action and violating fundamental precepts that should define the role of this court
in our system of government. In sitting as a superlegislature in this case, the
majority abandons its judicial role and appears to view separation of powers as a
hollow doctrine that can be easily tossed aside when it is expedient to do so. One
justice refers to separation of powers simply as a “political doctrine.”
        {¶ 226} The majority’s determination to order the General Assembly to enact
specific legislation will undoubtedly have repercussions beyond those the majority
intends. For example, the majority recognizes that its decision may implicate R.C.
3317.012(D)(4), and specifies that “the rate of millage charged off as the local share
of base cost funding * * * may not be changed from twenty-three mills, irrespective
of the language of” that statute. That is not the only additional section of the Revised
Code that the majority’s order will affect, but the extent of the majority’s decision
surely is not fully evident at this time. This court is not in a position to hold hearings,
and cannot consult experts on whether possible unforeseen consequences lurk in the
details of its mandated revisions. This further illustrates the dangers that arise when
courts act as if they were legislatures.
        {¶ 227} “While Ohio, unlike other jurisdictions, does not have a
constitutional provision specifying the concept of separation of powers, this
doctrine is implicitly embedded in the entire framework of those sections of the
Ohio Constitution that define the substance and scope of powers granted to the three
branches of state government.” S. Euclid v. Jemison (1986), 28 Ohio St.3d 157,
158-159, 28 OBR 250, 251, 503 N.E.2d 136, 138. See, also, State v. Harmon
(1877), 31 Ohio St. 250, 258, 1877 WL 19; State ex rel. Bray v. Russell (2000), 89
Ohio St.3d 132, 134, 729 N.E.2d 359, 361.




                                            85
                              SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




        {¶ 228} In State ex rel. Ohio Academy of Trial Lawyers v. Sheward (1999),
86 Ohio St.3d 451, 475, 715 N.E.2d 1062, 1085, this court stated:
        “In State v. Hochhausler (1996), 76 Ohio St.3d 455, 463, 668 N.E.2d 457,
465-466, Chief Justice Moyer explained as follows:
        “ ‘The principle of separation of powers is embedded in the constitutional
framework of our state government. The Ohio Constitution applies the principle in
defining the nature and scope of powers designated to the three branches of the
government. State v. Warner (1990), 55 Ohio St.3d 31, 43-44, 564 N.E.2d 18, 31.
See State v. Harmon (1877), 31 Ohio St. 250, 258. It is inherent in our theory of
government “ ‘that each of the three grand divisions of the government, must be
protected from the encroachments of the others, so far that its integrity and
independence may be preserved. * * *’ ” S. Euclid v. Jemison (1986), 28 Ohio
St.3d 157, 159, 28 OBR 250, 252, 503 N.E.2d 136, 138, quoting Fairview v. Giffee
(1905), 73 Ohio St. 183, 187, 76 N.E. 865, 866.’ “ See, also, Alexander Hamilton,
The Federalist No. 78 (1788) (Wills Ed.1982) 394 (quoting from Montesquieu, The
Spirit of Laws 181): “ ‘[T]here is no liberty, if the power of judging be not
separated from the legislative and executive powers.’ ”
        {¶ 229} It is noteworthy that the author of the majority opinion, who today
has few qualms in ordering the General Assembly to enact specific legislation,
stated in DeRolph I that “it is not this court’s place to * * * set policy or prioritize
the allocation of funds to other state programs. Members of the legislative branch
represent the collective will of the citizens of Ohio, and the manner in which public
schools are funded in this state is a fundamental policy decision that is within the
power of its citizens to change. Under our system of government, decisions such
as imposing new taxes, allocating public revenues to competing uses, and
formulating educational standards are not within the judiciary’s authority.” See 78
Ohio St.3d at 269-270, 677 N.E.2d at 786 (Moyer, C.J., dissenting). See, also, State
ex rel. Ohio Academy of Trial Lawyers v. Sheward, 86 Ohio St.3d at 526, 715




                                          86
                                January Term, 2001




N.E.2d at 1119 (Moyer, C.J., dissenting) (“I bow to no one in my respect for the
doctrine of separation of powers”).
       {¶ 230} Those in the majority in this case who were in the dissent in
DeRolph I and DeRolph II have now done an about-face. They expressed the clear
view in both of those cases that the system was constitutional. Now that the General
Assembly has further improved the system, those justices somehow believe that it
is only conditionally constitutional with the further changes this court orders the
General Assembly to make.
       {¶ 231} One point that cannot be overemphasized is that, were it not for
previous decisions of this court in this litigation, our system of public schools would
still be mired in the totally unsatisfactory condition it was in when this litigation
began in 1991. We all should remember that it was only due to this lawsuit that
residual budgeting for education was eliminated and the importance of our schools
came to the forefront. If the justices in dissent in DeRolph I and DeRolph II had
had their way, the unacceptable status quo would have endured.
       {¶ 232} Furthermore, those justices who were in the majority in DeRolph I
and DeRolph II and who are now in the majority in this opinion can similarly be
faulted for also abandoning their previous views for the sake of reaching the all-
important consensus that motivates today’s decision of the court. Their professed
fervor for the mandates of the Ohio Constitution, as expressed in the opinions in
DeRolph I and DeRolph II, obviously has waned to the point that they are willing
to enter into a political compromise that has little to do with the actual merits of
this case. It is most remarkable that one of the justices who joins the majority’s
decision once expressed the opinion that education is a fundamental constitutional
right and that, therefore, “[t]he state bears a heavy burden of demonstrating a
compelling state interest for the wealth-based disparities inherent in Ohio’s system
of school funding.” DeRolph I, 78 Ohio St.3d at 257, 677 N.E.2d at 777 (Douglas,
J., concurring).




                                          87
                               SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




        {¶ 233} That justice also has recognized in the past that it is not this court’s
role to legislate a constitutionally acceptable response, remarking in his concurring
opinion in DeRolph II:
        “The dissenters [in DeRolph II] can’t have it both ways, and the majority
opinion, recognizing this dichotomy, strikes a balance by, in specifics, respectfully
pointing out the constitutional shortcomings of the General Assembly’s remedial
efforts while refraining from mandating a particular course of action. In doing so the
majority further respects and recognizes that it is the right and prerogative, as well as
the sworn sacred duty, of the members of the General Assembly to put in place the
nuts and bolts of our state’s educational system.” (Emphasis added.) 89 Ohio St.3d
at 39, 728 N.E.2d at 1023 (Douglas, J., concurring).
        {¶ 234} That justice further observed that specifics and details of the
educational system must be “debated and decided by the General Assembly rather
than this court. Our sole mission is to see to it that the Constitution is honored
* * *.” (Emphasis added.) Id. (Douglas, J., concurring.) It is impossible to reconcile
those views with the position of the majority today.
        {¶ 235} In an attempt to detail his motivations for joining the majority’s
compromise opinion, Justice Douglas in his concurring opinion cleverly uses R.C.
1.50 to justify his position that the majority’s decision does not violate the doctrine of
separation of powers. In this discourse, he downplays the significance of the concept
of separation of powers (relegating it to the status of a mere “political doctrine”) and
overplays the reach of R.C. 1.50 beyond its appropriate scope in a creative attempt to
rationalize the majority’s decision. It is interesting that nowhere in the majority
opinion is R.C. 1.50 cited as validation for its actions.
        {¶ 236} The majority finds that the state’s employment of certain adjustments
in determining the base funding amount and the phase-in of parity aid are
unconstitutional. An indispensable aspect of severability is that the legislation
remaining must be constitutional for the severance to be effective. The mere striking




                                            88
                                 January Term, 2001




of the legislation found offensive would not accomplish the majority’s primary goal,
which is to increase funding to a level acceptable to the justices who constitute the
majority. Therefore a further consequence, wholly inconsistent with R.C. 1.50, arises,
since the state must pass legislation to give effect to the majority’s adjustments to the
plan and must fund the increased amounts, or the system obviously remains
unconstitutional. This requirement goes beyond the scope of R.C. 1.50 severance and
exposes the majority’s actions for what they truly are—judicial legislation that
actually redrafts the substance of the legislation, masquerading as acts that supposedly
are fully in accord with the separation of powers. By revising the state’s methodology
regarding the base amount and altering the phase-in period for parity aid, the majority
fundamentally disrupts the statutory scheme, substituting its own preferences for those
of the General Assembly. See Hochhausler, 76 Ohio St.3d at 464, 668 N.E.2d at 466,
citing State ex rel. Maurer v. Sheward (1994), 71 Ohio St.3d 513, 523, 644 N.E.2d
369, 377 (“Prior to severing a portion of a statute, we must first determine that the
severability will not fundamentally disrupt the statutory scheme of which the
unconstitutional provision is a part”).
        {¶ 237} In his concurring opinion, Justice Douglas also underscores that the
level of funding reflected in the basic aid amount is inadequate, even as increased by
the majority. He points out that in Michigan, the base foundation amount for 2002 is
$6,300. When the base amount set forth in H.B. 94 of $4,814 is augmented by the
adjustments imposed by the majority, the base amount increases by $331 per pupil for
FY02, using the numbers set out in the concurring opinion’s view of what the majority
adds by adjusting the base amount. This puts Ohio’s base amount at $5,145 for FY02.
The stark contrast between this amount and Michigan’s amount of $6,300 shows how
unrealistically low Ohio’s base amount remains when compared to our neighbor to
the north, and is compelling support for the proposition that our state’s funding system
is not yet thorough and efficient, even as augmented by the majority.




                                           89
                              SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




        {¶ 238} Finally, Justice Douglas attempts to bolster his position by asserting
that if this court were simply to hold the state’s plan unconstitutional as enacted, the
probable result would be a return to preexisting funding levels, thus jeopardizing
increases in funding (both those of H.B. 94 and those additional increases that will
result if the General Assembly enacts the legislation ordered by a majority of this
court) for many districts, and that members of the court are not “willing to risk losing
what has already been gained.” This assertion is based on a false premise and is
therefore erroneous. There is no reason to believe that, if this court had found the
funding system unconstitutional, the funding increases in the H.B. 94 plan would have
been eliminated. In both DeRolph I and DeRolph II, this court, even though it found
the systems under review unconstitutional and challenged the state to devise a
thorough and efficient system, allowed the existing system to remain in place until a
new system was devised. That approach is equally feasible in this case. That some
individuals and groups (especially many of our state’s lawmakers) are weary of this
case and may be resistant to further enactments is simply not a sufficient reason to
discard that option as not viable, when we realize that the educational futures of our
children are at stake.
        {¶ 239} While the task facing the state is of such consequence that it is
tempting to do what the majority has done and simply tell the General Assembly
what constitutes a thorough and efficient system, that is not the prerogative of the
judiciary. Rather, if the system is not thorough and efficient, this court should say
so and then, as we did in DeRolph I and DeRolph II, give the General Assembly
additional time to craft a constitutional system based on the momentum that has
been generated thus far. Perhaps if more time is given, the General Assembly will
succeed in achieving a complete and systematic overhaul of the school-funding
system. The majority is unable to resist the temptation to legislate an end to this
case, and so oversteps its role.




                                          90
                                 January Term, 2001




        {¶ 240} A long journey begins with a single step. Some steps have been
taken, but now the majority calls a halt to a journey that is nowhere near complete.
In DeRolph II, this court held that “ ‘[t]he attainment of efficiency and thoroughness
in [the] system’ of common schools is ‘expressly made a purpose, not local, not
municipal, but state-wide.’ ” Id., 89 Ohio St.3d 1, 728 N.E.2d 993, paragraph two
of the syllabus, quoting Miller v. Korns (1923), 107 Ohio St. 287, 297-298, 140
N.E. 773, 776.
        {¶ 241} Our school system is still not viewed as a statewide system by
some. Many raise the issue of local control, contending that local control justifies
local taxation. The majority is among this group, citing the importance of local
control in its praise for local property taxes.
        {¶ 242} It is only recently that the focus on a statewide system, as required
by the Constitution, has moved to the fore. Our state Constitution is clear in its
requirement that the system of public schools is a statewide system. See Miller v.
Korns, 107 Ohio St. at 297-298, 140 N.E. at 776. For many years, this requirement
was ignored, and problems within individual school districts were viewed as
distinctly local problems, which had to be solved by local efforts alone.
        {¶ 243} With statewide standards and statewide testing, we should
recognize that we have a state system of common schools. The state bears the
ultimate responsibility to solve problems (in partnership with the local districts)
that have been formerly viewed as local. Recognition of a statewide system of
schools envisioned by the Constitution may take generations to fully implement. It
is no wonder that people with the mindset that local problems are strictly local
would resist this process. Those who are reasonably satisfied with the status quo
within their own school districts fear that solutions to the problems of other local
districts will be at their expense. These views must be put aside, and a bipartisan
effort must continue to ensure that every child in Ohio will receive a thorough and
efficient education regardless of where he or she resides.




                                           91
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




       {¶ 244} There have been successful bipartisan efforts in the past with less
importance to the citizens of Ohio. In the 1980s, Ohio’s Statehouse in Columbus
had fallen into disrepair. It was so run down and uncared-for that it spoke poorly
of the state to everyone who toured or viewed it. The Governor and the General
Assembly saw the need and vowed to fix it. A true bipartisan effort was launched
to restore the structure. Through different administrations and sessions of the
General Assembly, our political leaders stayed the course, despite criticism of the
cost (approximately $112 million), which ended up being much higher than
estimated, and of the length of the project, which took six years to complete. Every
day they saw the urgency of the building’s failings and knew it would be a
continuing problem unless it was solved the right way. Years of neglect had to be
fixed, and cooperation was the common goal. Many have criticized the amount of
money spent on the renovation, but the point is that our legislators ignored those
criticisms and saw the task through to its end.
       {¶ 245} Our school-funding system can be analogized to this Statehouse
restoration project, but school funding has a much worthier goal. While the
Statehouse is a building that represents our government, in this case we are dealing
with the futures of our children. The state leaders who saw the necessity of
concerted action in renovating the Statehouse have failed to see the necessity of
bipartisan dedicated action here, to the detriment of all citizens of our state, and
especially our children, who have no political voice.          The same degree of
commitment appears to be lacking, and I believe this lack indicates a serious failure
to put the necessary emphasis on education in our state’s system of priorities.
       {¶ 246} It has been said, “If we refuse to fight for the dignity of truth, we
substitute expedience for justice.” This perceptive statement by an unknown author
aptly explains the majority’s motivation in reaching its decision. The majority places
entirely too much importance on political expedience and not nearly enough on
justice. Because the majority refuses to recognize that the state’s plan we review at




                                         92
                                  January Term, 2001




this time is clearly insufficient to comply with the requirements of our Constitution,
even with additional adjustments ordered by this court, I vigorously dissent.
                                __________________
        FRANCIS E. SWEENEY, SR., J., dissenting.
        {¶ 247} Respectfully, I dissent.
        {¶ 248} The genesis of this case dates back to 1991. Decades of fiscal neglect
and poverty prompted student Nathan DeRolph, from property-poor Perry County, to
challenge the state’s failure to adequately educate its youth. Today, Nathan is an adult.
What have we accomplished in all these years? Although steps have been taken to
improve Ohio’s primary and secondary education system, I do not believe our job is
done. In my opinion, the current legislation continues to suffer from fundamental
structural flaws. As a result, inequities remain and children in the poorest districts are
still being deprived of an adequate education.
        {¶ 249} In DeRolph I, we found that Ohio’s elementary and secondary public
school financing system was unconstitutional under Section 2, Article VI of the Ohio
Constitution. In declaring the system unconstitutional, we concluded, “Ohio’s public
school financing scheme must undergo a complete systematic overhaul.” DeRolph v.
State (1997), 78 Ohio St.3d 193, 212, 677 N.E.2d 733, 747. We reiterated this view
in DeRolph II, again declaring the revisions unconstitutional. DeRolph v. State
(2000), 89 Ohio St.3d 1, 37, 728 N.E.2d 993, 1021. Today, we review additional
changes that were enacted since our last decision.
        {¶ 250} The majority takes the unprecedented step of declaring the system
constitutional, but only after two revisions are made: (1) adjusting the base cost
formula and (2) fully funding the parity aid program by fiscal year 2004.
        {¶ 251} At the outset, I find it incredible that the majority takes it upon itself
to make unconstitutional legislation constitutional. This represents quite a departure
in philosophy from our past opinions, in which we adamantly stated that we would
not instruct the General Assembly on how to remedy the system. The majority




                                           93
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




compounds the problem by then taking a hands-off approach in the future. Rather
than retain jurisdiction over the matter and help ensure that these changes are made,
the majority steps aside, relying instead on the “good faith” of the defendants to
implement these changes. But what assurances do we truly have that these changes
and the rest of the current plan will be fully implemented?
       {¶ 252} Moreover, with the majority declaring the funding plan constitutional
(after the two modifications are implemented), at first glance it would appear that
giant steps have been taken in restructuring the way in which we fund public schools.
However, upon closer scrutiny, it is evident that the system does not encompass the
systematic overhaul envisioned and mandated by this court. The new legislation
merely tinkers with an existing framework that this court has twice struck down.
       {¶ 253} Overreliance on property taxes continues to be the predominant
root cause of the funding system’s constitutional defects. Although we underscored
in our prior opinions that property taxes could still be a component of the funding
structure, we stated that they could not be the “primary” source of funding. The
General Assembly has ignored the plain language of our mandate. Instead, it has
enacted legislation that, when applied statewide, still uses property taxes as the
primary means to fund our public school system. As a result, there continue to exist
large disparities in per pupil funding due to the uneven distribution in taxable
property valuation. This is not the result we intended.
       {¶ 254} As expressed in the Education Tax Policy Institute (“ETPI”) report,
which analyzed the new funding changes:
       “The piecemeal changes in the legislation do not fit together. They do not
overhaul the school funding system. They do not end the necessity for many
districts to return to the ballot on a regular basis simply to maintain existing levels
of service.”
       {¶ 255} The need to seek additional revenues through local levies is
staggering. In 1997, there were four hundred forty-seven school issues placed on




                                          94
                                January Term, 2001




the ballot. In 2000, there were four hundred forty-six. Moreover, the change in the
state’s share of total revenue received by school districts is almost imperceptible:
from 42.4 percent in FY93 to 43.7 percent in FY00. Even with the current budget,
the state’s attorney admitted in oral argument that this percentage will remain the
same or will be similar under the new plan. From this, it is easy to see that there is
no change in the manner in which school revenues are raised.
       {¶ 256} The majority believes that the General Assembly has solved the
problem of overreliance on local property taxes through increasing the base cost
amount, passing parity aid and gap aid legislation, and instituting millage caps.
However, rather than change the school-funding structure and create a new system
that is based on something other than property tax at its core, the General Assembly
has simply changed how much the state pays for schools. In doing so, the General
Assembly has diverted funding from areas such as higher education, mental health,
mental retardation, and other state agencies and given it to public education.
Although this may generate revenue in the short term, it cannot be relied upon as a
long-term solution to public education financing.
       {¶ 257} There are other serious flaws inherent in the new legislative plan.
Rather than discuss every deficiency, the following represent some examples of the
glaring inadequacies present in the revised funding plan. For instance, in theory,
the idea of subsidizing poorer districts with parity aid to compensate for the lower
amount of money generated in their districts is a good one. However, in practice,
it does not work. To begin with, as codified, parity aid is to be phased in over a
period of five years. R.C. 3317.0217(C)(1). Even with the court’s current order, if
parity aid is to be phased in by 2004, it still has a limited immediate effect.
Furthermore, according to the ETPI report, “[t]he ability of local effort to contribute
according to ability remains part of the total Parity aid structure.” (Emphasis sic.)
Thus, the ability to raise sufficient revenue again is intertwined with local effort




                                          95
                              SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




and the ability of each district to generate sufficient income based on its property
tax values.
        {¶ 258} Gap aid is also fraught with problems. What the majority opinion
fails to mention is that “[i]f a school district wants to levy local taxes to supplement
parity aid, it can do so only by foregoing all gap aid. Gap aid occurs only at the
expense of all local option taxes,” according to the EPTI report. Another problem
with gap aid is that it still results in phantom revenue. In DeRolph II, we stated that
phantom revenue occurs “ ‘when the growing property wealth of a school district
gives the illusion of a commensurably increasing revenue stream, which, in fact, is
not realized.’ “ 89 Ohio St.3d at 29, 728 N.E.2d at 1015, quoting Frederick Church
of the Legislative Budget Office. We found that H.B. 650, the predecessor of the
new gap aid legislation, resulted in phantom revenue. Id. at 30, 728 N.E.2d at 1016.
Since the current gap aid program is similar to that of the previously rejected
provision in H.B. 650, with the exception of an additional transportation
component, it too will result in phantom revenue. R.C. 3317.0216.
        {¶ 259} The issue of school facilities is another major concern. The state
has begun to address this monumental problem. Yet although funds are set aside
by the state for the current biennium, future funding remains uncertain. Whether
funding will be available depends upon the whims of the General Assembly, state
surpluses, the economy, and receipt of income from the tobacco settlement. Thus,
is it questionable whether the Governor’s twelve-year plan will be fully
implemented. Furthermore, even if there are sufficient funds available to rectify
the situation, no study has been conducted to show what the facility needs of school
districts are and whether they will be adequately addressed within this time period.
Finally, many of the school facilities programs still require districts to pass levies
as a prerequisite for obtaining school funding. E.g., R.C. 3318.05. Once again, the
tie-in to local property taxes continues to plague this area of school funding as well.




                                          96
                                January Term, 2001




       {¶ 260} Moreover, the majority fails to discuss the repeal of Ohio’s local
tax on business inventories. The repeal of this tax is significant and may indeed
result in an increased reliance on property tax. In 1997, according to ETPI, the
inventory tax generated $474 million in operating revenue, which was then 7.7
percent of total local property tax revenues.
       {¶ 261} Finally, the majority recognizes that there is a problem with the
way in which the base cost formula has been calculated. As a quick fix, the majority
states that the formula should be reworked to include districts from the top and
bottom five percent. Second, the formula should consider only those districts that
meet twenty of the twenty-seven performance standards without rounding. Third,
the base cost amount should not be lowered to adjust for the supposed echo effect.
However, even with these changes, the system itself still remains constitutionally
flawed. This is so because the state still has not determined what resources are
necessary so that disadvantaged students can have the same opportunities to achieve
as more affluent students.
       {¶ 262} Ohio is certainly not the only state struggling with the issue of
school funding. Michigan has taken the challenge head-on and has voluntarily
revamped its system without court challenges. 1993 Mich.Pub.Act No. 336 and
Acts cited in Section 6; see, generally, Mich. Comp. Laws Ann. 388.1601 et seq.
Michigan has instituted a new way in which to generate school revenue by
increasing its statewide sales tax and adding a statewide property tax. 1993
Pub.Acts Nos. 325, 331. However, the majority of state battles have been fought
in litigation. As a result, Vermont has instituted a statewide property tax to fund
education at the state support grant level of $5,000 per student, allowing additional
voted local property taxes subject to an equalization formula so that any property
tax rate produces the same funds per student in every district. This funding scheme
was upheld in Stowe Citizens for Responsible Government v. Vermont (1999), 169
Vt. 559, 730 A.2d 573. New Hampshire has likewise enacted a statewide uniform




                                         97
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




education property tax. However, this property tax was declared unconstitutional
because the tax phase-in was unequal between districts. Claremont School Dist. v.
Governor (1999), 144 N.H. 210, 744 A.2d 1107. Thus, the battle continues in that
state.
         {¶ 263} Apparently, in Ohio the battle is over. At the end of the day, can
we truly say that we have been victorious? Have we done all that we can for Ohio’s
schoolchildren?      Have we given the children throughout the state the same
opportunities to learn and to excel? Can we say that the children in poor, rural, or
urban areas have been given the same opportunities as their peers who happen to
be blessed with the good fortune of living in a wealthy district with a high property
tax base? In a statewide system of education, it should not matter where one lives.
However, under the current funding scheme, less wealthy districts must still rely on
the good graces of the General Assembly to make up revenue which property taxes
fail to generate. Is this truly the legacy we want to leave?
         {¶ 264} I recognize that inroads have been made and that the system is
better today than it was in 1991 when this lawsuit was filed. But we have not done
enough. The state still has not met its full obligation to educate the Nathan
DeRolphs of tomorrow. Inherent inequities remain. By deciding that the current
legislation is constitutional, after the implementation of two minor modifications,
we have missed the opportunity to make a genuine commitment to improving
public schools. The importance of adequately educating our youth cannot be
overstated. All aspects of our community life are linked to the quality of the
education our children receive. Full development of human potential serves all of
society. Our founding fathers recognized the importance of public education and
wanted a system that served all children, not just the wealthy among us. As stated
by David McCullough in his biography of John Adams, who was speaking in the
words of his time:




                                         98
                                January Term, 2001




       “[E]mphatically, [John Adams] urged the widest possible support for
education. ‘Laws for the liberal education of youth, especially for the lower classes
of people, are so extremely wise and useful that to a humane and generous mind,
no expense for this purpose would be thought extravagant.’ “ McCullough, John
Adams (2001) 103.
       {¶ 265} The hallmark of a thorough and efficient form of public education is
that it works as well for the least advantaged as it does for the most advantaged. The
funding system advocated by the majority sadly misses the mark.
       {¶ 266} Since there have been no fundamental changes to the school-
funding structure, I would find that the current legislation continues to violate the
Thorough and Efficient Clause of the Ohio Constitution.
       RESNICK, J., concurs in the foregoing dissenting opinion.
                               __________________
       COOK, J., dissenting.
       {¶ 267} It is beyond dispute that providing a thorough and efficient system of
common schools for the children of the state of Ohio is both a noble and necessary
endeavor. But the same Constitution that directs the General Assembly to provide
such a system also constrains this court’s role within Ohio’s governmental framework.
       {¶ 268} I continue to believe that this cause presents a nonjusticiable
political question. The fundamental principle of separation of powers and the
related doctrine of nonjusticiability prevent this court from deciding what a
“thorough and efficient” system of public schools requires. The term “thorough
and efficient” speaks to the question of educational quality, which is an issue that
unquestionably involves difficult policy choices and value judgments that courts
are not in the business of making. “The political question doctrine excludes from
judicial review those controversies which revolve around policy choices and value
determinations constitutionally committed for resolution to the halls of [the
legislature] or the confines of the Executive Branch.” Japan Whaling Assn. v. Am.




                                         99
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




Cetacean Soc. (1986), 478 U.S. 221, 230, 106 S.Ct. 2860, 2866, 92 L.Ed.2d 166,
178.
       {¶ 269} In Baker v. Carr (1962), 369 U.S. 186, 82 S.Ct. 691, 7 L.Ed.2d 663,
the United States Supreme Court identified six characteristics of political questions,
any one of which may render a controversy nonjusticiable:
       “[1] [A] textually demonstrable constitutional commitment of the issue to a
coordinate political department; or [2] a lack of judicially discoverable and
manageable standards for resolving it; or [3] the impossibility of deciding without
an initial policy determination of a kind clearly for nonjudicial discretion; or [4]
the impossibility of a court’s undertaking independent resolution without
expressing lack of the respect due coordinate branches of government; or [5] an
unusual need for unquestioning adherence to a political decision already made; or
[6] the potentiality of embarrassment from multifarious pronouncements by various
departments on one question.” (Emphasis added.) Id. at 217, 82 S.Ct. at 710, 7
L.Ed.2d at 686.
       {¶ 270} The dissent in DeRolph v. State (1997), 78 Ohio St.3d 193, 677
N.E.2d 733 (“DeRolph I”), offered a compelling explanation why the first two
factors cut in favor of the conclusion that the Education Clause of the Ohio
Constitution commits to the General Assembly the power to define what constitutes
a “thorough and efficient” system of schools. See id. at 264-283, 677 N.E.2d at
782-795 (Moyer, C.J., Cook and Lundberg Stratton, JJ., dissenting). Today’s
decision underscores the nonjusticiability of the issue by implicating the third
factor. The majority opinion is notable for the absence of genuine constitutional
analysis. What the opinion sets forth instead are policy determinations “of a kind
clearly for nonjudicial discretion,” Baker, 369 U.S. at 217, 82 S.Ct. at 710, 7
L.Ed.2d at 686, thus confirming that the issues involved are nonjusticiable political
questions.




                                         100
                                  January Term, 2001




        {¶ 271} The majority orders the General Assembly to make specific changes
that are “required” before the current funding plan will be constitutional: adjusting the
base cost formula and accelerating by two years the full funding of the “parity aid
program.” By ordering particular legislative action—based on its own concept of
what is necessary to guarantee educational quality—the majority has made an initial
policy determination that the judiciary is ill-equipped to make and that is characteristic
of nonjusticiability. As the Illinois Supreme Court recognized:
        “It would be a transparent conceit to suggest that whatever standards of
quality courts might develop would actually be derived from the constitution in any
meaningful sense. Nor is education a subject within the judiciary’s field of
expertise, such that a judicial role in giving content to the education guarantee
might be warranted. Rather, the question of educational quality is inherently one
of policy involving philosophical and practical considerations that call for the
exercise of legislative and administrative discretion.” Commt. for Educational
Rights v. Edgar (1996), 174 Ill.2d 1, 28-29, 220 Ill.Dec. 166, 672 N.E.2d 1178,
1191; cf. San Antonio Indep. School Dist. v. Rodriguez (1973), 411 U.S. 1, 43, 93
S.Ct. 1278, 1302, 36 L.Ed.2d 16, 49 (“the judiciary is well advised to refrain from
imposing on the States inflexible constitutional restraints that could circumscribe
or handicap the continued research and experimentation so vital to finding even
partial solutions to educational problems and to keeping abreast of ever-changing
conditions”).
        {¶ 272} The decisions about how to define educational quality, and the
related question of how we pay for the pursuit of that ideal, are better left to the
legislature, which, unlike the judiciary, is a branch of government well suited to
make such vitally important policy choices. “In a climate of finite resources, the
General Assembly, with its function of reaching decisions through compromise and
consideration of popular opinion, has the greatest legitimacy in making budget
decisions that require a choice among priorities.” DeRolph v. State (1997), 78 Ohio




                                           101
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




St.3d 419, 425, 678 N.E.2d 886, 891 (Cook, J., dissenting). By once again choosing
to adjudicate a nonjusticiable political question, today’s majority continues to tread
upon the General Assembly’s legitimate constitutional role—thereby thwarting the
will of the people of this state as expressed through their elected representatives.
       {¶ 273} Even assuming that this court properly reached the merits in
DeRolph I, I continue to believe that once this court declared the school-funding
system unconstitutional, “[t]here remain[ed] nothing more for this, or any other,
court to do.” DeRolph, 78 Ohio St.3d at 424, 678 N.E.2d at 890 (Cook, J.,
dissenting). This court’s remand to the trial court, vesting “plenary jurisdiction” to
decide the constitutional validity of funding statutes that the General Assembly had
not yet even enacted, violated basic precepts of appellate jurisprudence. Id. at 424,
678 N.E.2d at 890 (Cook, J., dissenting). This court also took the peculiar step of
eschewing traditional intermediate appellate review, ordering that any decision on
remand would come directly to this court. Id. at 421, 678 N.E.2d at 888. Such
action led the majority to create a heretofore unknown “hybrid” cause in this
court—a case that is “not an original action” yet “not a traditional appeal, in which
the court has a previously established record available for review.” DeRolph v.
State (2001), 91 Ohio St.3d 1274, 1275, 747 N.E.2d 823, 824. There was no sound
basis in law for any of these extraordinary acts.
       {¶ 274} Further, when the majority again held Ohio’s school-funding
system unconstitutional in DeRolph v. State (2000), 89 Ohio St.3d 1, 728 N.E.2d
993 (“DeRolph II”), I dissented from the majority’s assertion that it could require a
revision of the General Assembly’s enactments. Id. at 57, 728 N.E.2d at 1036
(Cook, J., dissenting). The majority’s approach in DeRolph II violated basic tenets
of our democracy. “Unless the other branches of government are to be totally
subordinate to the judiciary, we cannot direct the General Assembly in the
performance of its legislative duties.” DeRolph, 78 Ohio St.3d at 425, 678 N.E.2d
at 891 (Cook, J., dissenting).




                                         102
                                January Term, 2001




       {¶ 275} Today’s decision ordering the General Assembly to adopt specific
legislation not only continues DeRolph II’s misguided approach, but also goes a
disconcerting step further. The majority has either forgotten or deliberately chosen
to ignore this court’s prior express assurance that it would not order the General
Assembly to enact specific legislation as part of a remedy: “[I]t might be tempting
for this court to do its own analysis, for example, determining the level of funding
per pupil to achieve a thorough and efficient system, and then ordering that amount
of funding. * * * However, * * * [t]hat degree of involvement in fashioning a
remedy in this case is not, nor should ever be, how we perceive our role. Our role,
as we have declared in past cases, is to decide issues of constitutionality—not to
legislate, as some may believe.” (Emphasis added.) DeRolph II, 89 Ohio St.3d at
12, 728 N.E.2d at 1003.
       {¶ 276} Finally, I also question the majority’s application of the law-of-the-
case doctrine here. Contrary to the majority’s assertion that the law-of-the-case
doctrine “require[s]” this court to evaluate the constitutionality of the system now
in place, the doctrine contains significant limitations and exceptions.         It is
considered to be “a rule of practice rather than a binding rule of substantive law.”
Nolan v. Nolan (1984), 11 Ohio St.3d 1, 3, 11 OBR 1, 3, 462 N.E.2d 410, 413; see,
also, Christianson v. Colt Industries Operating Corp. (1988), 486 U.S. 800, 817,
108 S.Ct. 2166, 2178, 100 L.Ed.2d 811, 831 (“the law-of-the-case doctrine ‘merely
expresses the practice of courts generally to refuse to reopen what has been decided,
not a limit to their power,’ “ quoting Messinger v. Anderson [1912], 225 U.S. 436,
444, 32 S.Ct. 739, 740, 56 L.Ed. 1152, 1156). The procedural and substantive
infirmities I have discussed suggest that this is a case to which the doctrine should
not apply.
       {¶ 277} The majority quotes Thomas Jefferson for the proposition that it is
necessary to “sacrific[e] our opinions sometimes to the opinions of others for the
sake of harmony.” Willingness to compromise is, of course, an essential quality




                                        103
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




for legislators, who must continually balance competing policy interests as they
discharge their constitutionally prescribed functions. Indeed, in the very passage
quoted by the majority, Jefferson discusses a legislative matter then pending in
Congress. 16 Papers of Thomas Jefferson (Boyd Ed.1961) 598 (letter to Francis
Eppes, July 4, 1790). As a judge, however, I am unwilling to sacrifice what the
majority correctly describes as my “deeply held beliefs regarding the responsibility
of the court as an institution.” I am confident that my unwillingness to do so is
justified, given that the majority’s compromise—though well intentioned—results
in an order requiring the General Assembly to enact legislation implementing a few
judges’ view of appropriate public policy. The judicial oath of office requires me
to support the Ohio Constitution and to perform the duties of a judge—not of a
legislator. See R.C. 3.23.
       {¶ 278} I have opined from the outset that the Ohio Constitution commits
budgetary decisions regarding school funding to the mechanisms of democracy.
Yet this court continues to infringe upon matters that lie within the distinct purview
of the collective judgment of our elected representatives in the Ohio General
Assembly.
       {¶ 279} Because I would dismiss this cause, I respectfully dissent.
                               __________________
       Bricker & Eckler, L.L.P., Nicholas A. Pittner, John F. Birath, Jr., Sue W.
Yount, Quintin F. Lindsmith and Susan B. Greenberger, for appellees.
       Betty D. Montgomery, Attorney General, Mary Lynn Readey, Roger F.
Carroll and James G. Tassie, Assistant Attorneys General, for appellants.
       Walter & Haverfield, P.L.L., James E. Betts and Frederick W. Whatley, for
amicus curiae Alliance for Adequate School Funding, in support of appellees.
       John P. Concannon, for amicus curiae Cincinnati School District Board of
Education, in support of appellees.




                                         104
                               January Term, 2001




       Bricker & Eckler, L.L.P., and Kimball H. Carey, for amici curiae Buckeye
Association of School Administrators, Ohio School Boards Association, and Ohio
Association of School Business Officials, in support of appellees.
       Patrick F. Timmins, Jr., for amicus curiae Coalition of Rural and
Appalachian Schools, in support of appellees.
       Louis B. Geneva Co., L.P.A., and M. Jayne H. Geneva, for amici curiae
Coalition for School Funding Reform, Cleveland Heights-University Heights City
School District, Lakewood City School District, Shaker Heights City School
District, and Community Advocates for Public Education, in support of appellees.
       Carson, Sowash & Ferrier and Herman A. Carson, for amicus curiae
Federal Hocking Local School District, in support of appellees.
       Hugh Calkins, for amicus curiae Initiatives in Urban Education Foundation,
in support of appellees.
       Courtney M. Wilson, for amicus curiae League of Women Voters of Ohio,
in support of appellees.
       John T. Ryerson and Susan Truitt, for amicus curiae Ohio Association for
Gifted Children, in support of appellees.
       Thomas C. Drabick, Jr., for amicus curiae Ohio Association of Public
School Employees/AFSCME Local 4, AFL-CIO, in support of appellees.
       Christopher Lopez; Kalniz, Iorio & Feldstein Co., L.P.A., Ted Iorio and
Christine A. Reardon, for amicus curiae Ohio Education Association, in support of
appellees.
       Ulmer & Berne, L.L.P., Donald J. Mooney, Jr., and Yelena Boxer; Schnorf
& Schnorf Co., L.P.A., and David M. Schnorf, for amicus curiae Ohio Federation
of Teachers, in support of appellees.
       Ben Espy Co., L.P.A., and Ben E. Espy, for amici curiae members of the
Ohio House of Representatives Jack Ford, Dixie J. Allen, John E. Barnes, Jr.,
Catherine L. Barrett, Joyce Beatty, John Boccieri, Samuel T. Britton, Kenneth A.




                                        105
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




Carano, Mary M. Cirelli, Wayne E. Coates, Dean E. DePiero, L. George Distel,
Steven L. Driehaus, Teresa Fedor, Bryan Flannery, William J. Hartnett, Peter
Lawson Jones, Annie L. Key, K. Eileen Krupinski, Anthony Latell, Jr., G. Daniel
Metelsky, Dale Miller, Ray Miller, Mary Rose Oakar, William L. Ogg, Robert J.
Otterman, Sylvester Patton, Jr., Jeanine Perry, Chris Redfern, Ronald Rhine,
Derrick Seaver, Daniel J. Sferra, Shirley A. Smith, Fred Strahorn, Erin Sullivan,
Joseph P. Sulzer, Barbara Ann Sykes, Charles A. Wilson, Jr., and Claudette
Woodward, and members of the Ohio Senate Leigh E. Herington, Daniel Brady,
Gregory L. DiDonato, Ben E. Espy, Eric Fingerhut, Linda J. Furney, Robert F.
Hagan, Mark Mallory, Rhine McLin, C.J. Prentiss, Timothy J. Ryan, and Michael
C. Shoemaker, in support of appellees.
       Ben Espy Co., L.P.A., and Ben E. Espy, for amicus curiae Ohio Legislative
Black Caucus, in support of appellees.
       Susan G. Tobin, for amicus curiae Ohio Legal Rights Service, in support of
appellees.
       John M. Haseley, for amicus curiae United States Congressman Ted
Strickland, in support of appellees.
       Benesch, Friedlander, Coplan & Aronoff and N. Victor Goodman, for amici
curiae Richard H. Finan, President of the Ohio Senate, and Larry Householder,
Speaker of the Ohio House of Representatives, in support of appellants.
       Jones, Day, Reavis & Pogue, Jeffrey S. Sutton, Chad A. Readler and Mary
Beth Young, for amicus curiae Ohio Board of Regents, in support of appellants.
       Porter, Wright, Morris & Arthur, L.L.P., Robert W. Trafford, James D.
Curphey, Jennifer T. Mills and Constance M. Greaney, for amici curiae Ohio
Business Roundtable, Ohio Manufacturers’ Association, National Federation of
Independent Business/Ohio, Ohio Council of Retail Merchants, Ohio Chamber of
Commerce, and Ohio Farm Bureau Federation, in support of appellants.




                                         106
                               January Term, 2001




       John S. Jones, for amicus curiae Ohio Coalition for the Education of
Children With Disabilities, in support of appellants.
       Chester, Willcox & Saxbe and John J. Chester, for amicus curiae Ohio
Governor Bob Taft, in support of appellants.
       Betty D. Montgomery, Attorney General, and Robert C. Maier, Assistant
Attorney General, for amicus curiae Tax Commissioner of Ohio, in support of
appellants.
                              __________________




                                        107

§ derolph-iv
title: DeRolph IV, 2002
effective: 
legislation: https://www.supremecourt.ohio.gov/rod/docs/pdf/0/2002/2002-ohio-6750.pdf
--
[This opinion has been published in Ohio Official Reports at 97 Ohio St.3d 434.]




  DEROLPH ET AL., APPELLEES, v. THE STATE OF OHIO ET AL., APPELLANTS.
                    [Cite as DeRolph v. State, 2002-Ohio-6750.]
Constitutional      law—Education—Schools—Current                school-funding    system
        unconstitutional—General Assembly directed to enact a school-funding
        scheme that is thorough and efficient.
 (No. 1999-0570—Submitted October 30, 2001—Decided December 11, 2002.)
                  Common Pleas Court of Perry County, No. 22043.
                          ON MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION.
                                  __________________
        PFEIFER, J.
        {¶1} In DeRolph v. State (2001), 93 Ohio St.3d 309, 310, 754 N.E.2d 1184
(“DeRolph III”), this court issued an opinion with which none of the majority was
“completely comfortable.” As the author, Chief Justice Moyer, noted, we did so in
an attempt to eliminate the “uncertainty and fractious debate” occasioned by our
continued role in the case. Id. at 311, 754 N.E.2d 1184. A motion was filed asking
this court to reconsider its decision. We granted that motion and ordered a
settlement conference pursuant to S.Ct.Prac.R. XIV(6)(A).                DeRolph v. State
(2001), 93 Ohio St.3d 628, 758 N.E.2d 1113. Settlement efforts were unavailing,
and we now rule on the merits of the case on reconsideration.
        {¶2} In DeRolph v. State (1997), 78 Ohio St.3d 193, 677 N.E.2d 733,
syllabus, (“DeRolph I”), this court stated, “Ohio’s elementary and secondary public
school financing system violates Section 2, Article VI of the Ohio Constitution,
which mandates a thorough and efficient system of common schools throughout the
state.” In DeRolph I, this court admonished the General Assembly to create a new
school-funding system, but otherwise provided no specific guidance as to how to
enact a constitutional school-funding system. Id. at 213, 677 N.E.2d 733. See id.
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




at 262, 677 N.E.2d 733 (Pfeifer, J., concurring) (the majority opinion “does neither
more nor less than the syllabus law sets forth”).
       {¶3} Three years later, after the General Assembly had enacted various
changes to the school-funding system, this court again determined that the school-
funding system was unconstitutional. DeRolph v. State (2000), 89 Ohio St.3d 1,
728 N.E.2d 993 (“DeRolph II”). We stated, “ ‘[T]he sovereign people made it
mandatory upon the General Assembly to secure not merely a system of common
schools,’ but rather a thorough and efficient system of common schools. Miller v.
Korns (1923), 107 Ohio St. 287, 297-298, 140 N.E. 773, 776, approved and
followed.” DeRolph II, paragraph one of the syllabus. As in DeRolph I, the
majority did not provide specific guidance to the General Assembly as to how to
enact a constitutional school-funding system. But, see, DeRolph II at 47, 728
N.E.2d 993 (Pfeifer, J., concurring). Some of us praised the efforts of the General
Assembly, and that praise was deserved. Id. at 41, 728 N.E.2d 993 (Douglas, J.,
concurring).
       {¶4} We are aware of the difficulties that the General Assembly must
overcome, and that is why we have been patient. The consensus arrived at in
DeRolph III was in many ways the result of impatience. We do not regret that
decision, because it reflected a genuine effort by the majority to reach a solution to
a troubling constitutional issue. However, upon being asked to reconsider that
decision, we have changed our collective mind. Despite the many good aspects of
DeRolph III, we now vacate it. Accordingly, DeRolph I and II are the law of the
case, and the current school-funding system is unconstitutional.
       {¶5} To date, the principal legislative response to DeRolph I and DeRolph
II has been to increase funding, which has benefited many schoolchildren.
However, the General Assembly has not focused on the core constitutional directive
of DeRolph I: “a complete systematic overhaul” of the school-funding system. Id.,
78 Ohio St.3d at 212, 677 N.E.2d 733. Today we reiterate that that is what is




                                          2
                                January Term, 2002




needed, not further nibbling at the edges. Accordingly, we direct the General
Assembly to enact a school-funding scheme that is thorough and efficient, as
explained in DeRolph I, DeRolph II, and the accompanying concurrences.
       {¶6} We are not unmindful of the difficulties facing the state, but those
difficulties do not trump the Constitution. Section 2, Article VI of the Ohio
Constitution states, “The general assembly shall make such provisions, by taxation,
or otherwise, as, with the income arising from the school trust fund, will secure a
thorough and efficient system of common schools * * *.” This language is
essentially unchanged from the initial report from the Standing Committee on
Education at the Constitutional Convention of 1850-51. I Report of the Debates
and Proceedings of the Convention for the Revision of the Constitution, 1850-51
(1851) 693 (“Debates”). Even the minority report, presented by those opposed to
the above language, had virtually the same import.        It stated, “The General
Assembly shall provide by law a system of common schools, and permanent means
for the support thereof * * *.” Id. at 694.
       {¶7} The delegates and through them the people of this state expressed their
desire for more and better education and their desire that the state should be
responsible for it. Delegate J. McCormick, from Adams County, stated, “Under
the old Constitution it is provided that public schools and the cause of education
shall be forever encouraged; and, under this constitutional provision, we have
trusted the General Assembly for forty-eight years; and we may trust them for forty-
eight years longer, without any good result. * * * Our system of common schools,
instead of improving in legislative hands, has been degenerating; and I think it is
time that we should take the thing in hands ourselves.” II Debates 702. William
Hawkins, a delegate from Morgan County, said, “[W]e are warranted by public
sentiment in requiring at the hands of the General Assembly a full, complete and
efficient system of public education.” Id. at 16. The delegates perceived the
General Assembly of that time as being insufficiently committed to education.




                                          3
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




Even though some delegates wanted to leave matters wholly to local authorities,
see id. at 17, the delegates in their wisdom decided to include the Thorough and
Efficient Clause in the Constitution. They and the people used the Constitution to
command ongoing affirmative action by the General Assembly.
       {¶8} James Taylor, a delegate from Erie County, stated, “I think it must be
clear to every reflecting mind that the true policy of the statesman is to provide the
means of education, and consequent moral improvement, to every child in the State,
the offspring of the black man equally with that of the white man, the children of
the poor equally with the rich.” Id. at 11. Samuel Quigley, a delegate from
Columbiana County, stated, “[T]he report directs the Legislature to make full and
ample provision for securing a thorough and efficient system of common school
education, free to all the children in the State. The language of this section is
expressive of the liberality worthy a great State, and a great people. There is no
stopping place here short of a common school education to all children in the State.”
Id. at 14. The delegates knew what they wanted, what the people wanted, and that
it was necessary to use the Constitution to achieve what they wanted.
       {¶9} The Thorough and Efficient Clause is part of our Constitution and part
of our heritage. There were delegates who approved of even stronger language.
Delegate McCormick proposed “a consolidation of all the general and local funds
of the State, and distribution of the amount equally among the children of the State.”
II Debates at 17. Otway Curry, a delegate from Union County, expressed his
concern that the Thorough and Efficient Clause would “prove totally insufficient
and powerless.” Id. at 710. Were this court to avoid its responsibility to give
continued meaning to the Constitution, his fears would become reality.
       {¶10} The Constitution of this state is the bedrock of our society. It
expressly directs the General Assembly to secure a thorough and efficient system
of common schools, and it does so expressly because the legislature of the mid-
nineteenth century would not. As R.P. Ranney, a delegate from Trumbull County,




                                          4
                                  January Term, 2002




put it, “I desire to lay a plan such as within certain limits the Legislature shall be
bound to carry out.” Id. at 16.
       {¶11} We realize that the General Assembly cannot spend money it does
not have. Nevertheless, we reiterate that the constitutional mandate must be met.
The Constitution protects us whether the state is flush or destitute. The Free Speech
Clause of the United States Constitution, the Equal Protection Clause of the United
States Constitution, the Thorough and Efficient Clause of the Ohio Constitution,
and all other provisions of the Ohio and United States Constitutions protect and
guard us at all times. Harman Stidger, a delegate from Stark County, said, “If we
should leave every thing to the Legislature, why not adjourn this Convention sine
die, at once?” Id. at 11. The same could be said of this court and the Ohio
Constitution.
                                                              Judgment accordingly.
       RESNICK and F.E. SWEENEY, JJ., concur.
       RESNICK, J., concurs separately.
       DOUGLAS, J., concurs in judgment only.
       LUNDBERG STRATTON, J., concurs in part and dissents in part.
       MOYER, C.J., dissents.
       COOK, J., dissents.
                                __________________
       ALICE ROBIE RESNICK, J., concurring.
       {¶12} I concur in today’s majority opinion. Given the views I expressed in
my dissent in DeRolph v. State (2001), 93 Ohio St.3d 309, 344-375, 754 N.E.2d
1184 (“DeRolph III”), I of course agree with this court’s decision to vacate the
majority opinion in DeRolph III. I have no desire to reiterate in detail the contents
of that dissent, which were consistent with my views in DeRolph v. State (1997),
78 Ohio St.3d 193, 677 N.E.2d 733 (“DeRolph I”), and DeRolph v. State (2000),
89 Ohio St.3d 1, 728 N.E.2d 993 (“DeRolph II”). It appears that much of what this




                                          5
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




court stated in DeRolph I and II has fallen on deaf ears. It is not likely that stating
at length the same message once again would have much of an effect; rather, it
probably would be preaching to the choir, in that only those whose viewpoints align
with mine would listen, and the rest of the members of the General Assembly would
continue to do nothing.
       {¶13} That said, I regret that I must nevertheless write. Even though it
seems that everything that can be said in this case has already been said, there is a
need to send an additional message to the citizens of Ohio and to respond to the
Chief Justice’s critical dissenting opinion. The Chief Justice appears to be sending
his own strong message to the General Assembly that there is no need to do
anything further in Ohio to provide each child an adequate education, beyond the
trivial face-saving changes he proposes.
       {¶14} To that end, the Chief Justice ignores the deficiencies in the
legislative response thus far and, as did his majority opinion in DeRolph III, seems
to believe that a half-fought battle is equivalent to a resounding victory as long as
this court is no longer involved in this case. As one who has also been immersed
in this case for a number of years, and as the author of the majority opinion in
DeRolph II, I emphatically disagree with the Chief Justice’s view of the legislative
initiatives enacted in response to the pronouncements of this court.
       {¶15} The Chief Justice bemoans the fact that further litigation may be
inevitable in light of the decision today, calling that possibility an “unfortunate
eventuality.” Infra at ¶ 35 (Moyer, C.J., dissenting). However, what the Chief
Justice’s imperceptive view ignores is that as long as the General Assembly does
not definitively fix the school-funding problem, which is its task alone, or at least
make a realistic effort to do so, further litigation will be inevitable as a matter of
course, since the court is the only body that definitively determines the
constitutionality of laws.




                                           6
                                January Term, 2002




       {¶16} In the normal case, when this court finds a particular statute or series
of statutes unconstitutional, there is no thought given to retaining jurisdiction,
because we assume that our constitutional adjudication will be respected and that
if the General Assembly decides to reenact similar legislation, it will take the
necessary steps to transform what has been determined to be unconstitutional into
something that complies with our Constitution. But as history shows, the General
Assembly has never mounted a concerted effort to fix the school-funding crisis and,
given the tenor of the Chief Justice’s dissent, will not be expected to put forth a
good-faith effort to do so in the future. Given that state of affairs, it does seem
likely that further litigation will be forthcoming in the area of school funding, even
though it apparently will be under a name other than DeRolph. However, while the
Chief Justice sees this situation as “unfortunate,” I view it as inevitable precisely
because so long as the system remains unconstitutional, our students’ interests can
be furthered only by continuing to press for the reformation of the system.
       {¶17} As I and other members of this court have repeatedly stated, until a
complete systematic overhaul of the system is accomplished, it will continue to be
far from thorough and efficient and will continue to shortchange our students. The
overreliance on local property taxes is the fatal flaw that until rectified will stand
in the way of constitutional compliance. One thing the now-vacated majority
opinion in DeRolph III, along with the various accompanying opinions, served to
illustrate is that the system we have reviewed simply falls far short of satisfying the
requirements of our Constitution. Today’s result drives home that point, albeit
belatedly.
       {¶18} The Chief Justice disingenuously tries to blunt the force of this
court’s decisions in DeRolph I and DeRolph II by focusing only on the syllabus
paragraphs of those two decisions and ignoring the full content and import of what
this court actually said. He labels everything beyond the syllabus paragraphs in
those two decisions “dicta,” and thereby downplays the clear requirement voiced




                                          7
                               SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




by the majority opinions in those two cases that our school-funding system will
never be truly thorough and efficient until a complete systematic overhaul of the
system is accomplished. As the majority states, “ ‘a complete systematic overhaul’
of the school-funding system” surely was the “core constitutional directive of
DeRolph I” and also was a very large part of DeRolph II. Supra at ¶ 5.
        {¶19} Of course, the Chief Justice was not in the majority in those two
decisions, and his effort to recast this court’s holdings into something more to his
liking rings hollow. The Chief Justice’s majority opinion in DeRolph III featured
this same transparent ploy to justify his implausible view that a system that he had
approved in his dissents in both DeRolph I and DeRolph II had somehow become
unconstitutional in his eyes in DeRolph III (even though more improvements to the
system had been made since DeRolph II), unless the further changes ordered by the
DeRolph III majority were accomplished.
        {¶20} In trying to recast the opinions in DeRolph I and DeRolph II into
something that he can agree with, the Chief Justice attempts to pass off his own
distorted vision of this case as if it were perfectly logical and well reasoned. In my
view, today’s decision, by vacating the majority opinion in DeRolph III, gives a
fitting burial to an initiative of this court that was ill advised from the start.
        {¶21} It becomes obvious that the only practical solution to the dilemma
posed by this case lies with the citizens of Ohio. The voters of Ohio have the power
to pass a constitutional amendment to the Thorough and Efficient Clause, Section
2, Article VI of the Ohio Constitution, which for all time will require an adequate
amount of funding to be spent on every Ohio student regardless of where in the
state that child resides. A constitutional amendment is necessary to remedy the
General Assembly’s failure to perform its responsibilities.
        {¶22} One possibility for amending the Thorough and Efficient Clause
would be to adopt a requirement of a specific dollar amount of spending for each
pupil and a formula for arriving at that number that would ensure that each district




                                            8
                                January Term, 2002




has sufficient funds to operate effectively year after year. In that scenario, it would
be necessary to include a provision for adjusting the specific dollar amount, to keep
pace with inflation and with any other changes in costs that may occur. In this way,
if the per-pupil spending is established at an adequate level, overreliance on local
property taxes will be eliminated. The state will thereby be required to fund the
system at a level that complies with the specific constitutional mandate.
       {¶23} I do not lightly advocate amendments to our state’s Constitution,
which already seems to be more detailed in many areas than it should be. However,
in the school-funding area, the stakes are sufficiently high that I do not hesitate to
make an exception in view of the General Assembly’s reluctance to act. Our
education system is the backbone of our democracy and the future of our state. We
must give each student a realistic opportunity to succeed, and our current funding
system does not do so. This continuing untenable situation has been allowed to
endure for far too long, and far too many students have been shortchanged.
       {¶24} A majority of this court now corrects a situation that was created
simply by a desire for an expedient resolution of this case. Because the current
school-funding legislation falls well short of satisfying the requirements of our
Constitution, I concur in today’s decision and strongly encourage the citizens of
Ohio to pursue a constitutional amendment that the General Assembly will not be
able to ignore.
                               __________________
       DOUGLAS, J., concurring in judgment only.
       {¶25} The Chief Justice, in his dissent herein, in Section D, entitled
“Summary,” well states my position on the matter pending before us. I would, as
he suggests, reaffirm our decision in DeRolph III with the exception of the wealth-
screening issue. There are not, however, four votes for that approach. Accordingly,
I concur only in the judgment of the majority.
                               __________________




                                          9
                              SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




        Lundberg Stratton, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part.
        {¶26} In DeRolph v. State (2001), 93 Ohio St.3d 309, 754 N.E.2d 1184
(“DeRolph III”), I concurred in the decision, not because I believed the school-
funding system to be unconstitutional, but rather as a pragmatic compromise to end
our role in defining what was “thorough and efficient,” under the Ohio Constitution,
because it was not our role in the first place to determine this issue. I continue to
adhere to the dissents I joined in DeRolph v. State (1997), 78 Ohio St.3d 193, 677
N.E.2d 733, and DeRolph v. State (2000), 89 Ohio St.3d 1, 728 N.E.2d 993
(“DeRolph II”).
        {¶27} I joined the majority that granted the motion to reconsider DeRolph
III not because I “changed my collective mind” as the majority asserts, but because
both sides conceded that we had been provided faulty data which made the formulas
before us inaccurate. Since we are not permitted to go outside the record, we could
not have verified the evidence on our own accord. Having based our decision on
testimony that was conceded by both parties to be wrong, it was legally necessary
for us to reconsider it.
        {¶28} The former majority has regrouped, and now merely declares the
funding system not yet constitutional and dismisses the case. While I do not agree
with its conclusion, I do believe that it is proper for the majority to dismiss the case
once it has reached a finding of unconstitutionality. In that aspect, I differ with
Chief Justice Moyer. In no case other than DeRolph have we retained jurisdiction
once we have made a finding of unconstitutionality. We are not charged by the
Constitution with fashioning new legislation that we believe meets the
constitutional mandate. That role is assigned only to the legislature, and to the
legislature has that role now been properly returned.
        {¶29} Therefore, I dissent from the holding that the progress made under
DeRolph II still falls short of a “thorough and efficient system,” but given the




                                          10
                                 January Term, 2002




majority’s decision that the funding system is still unconstitutional, I agree that the
majority is correct in not retaining jurisdiction.
                                __________________
        MOYER, C.J., dissenting.
                                           I
                       Majority Decision on Reconsideration
        {¶30} On September 6, 2001, this court rendered its third decision on the
merits in this case concerning the constitutionality of Ohio’s system of funding
public primary and secondary education. DeRolph v. State (2001), 93 Ohio St.3d
309, 754 N.E.2d 1184 (“DeRolph III”). On September 17, 2001, the defendants-
appellants, the state of Ohio, the Ohio Board of Education, the Ohio Superintendent
of Public Instruction, and the Ohio Department of Education (collectively referred
to as “the state”), filed a motion asking this court to reconsider that decision.
        {¶31} S.Ct.Prac.R. XI(2)(A)(4) allows a motion for reconsideration of a
decision on the merits of a case. “We have invoked the reconsideration procedures
set forth in S.Ct.Prac.R. XI to correct decisions which, upon reflection, are deemed
to have been made in error.” State ex rel. Huebner v. W. Jefferson Village Council
(1996), 75 Ohio St.3d 381, 383, 662 N.E.2d 339. See, also, Buckeye Community
Hope Found. v. Cuyahoga Falls (1998), 82 Ohio St.3d 539, 697 N.E.2d 181.
        {¶32} In November 2001, we granted the state’s motion for reconsideration,
thereby delaying issuance of a mandate. DeRolph v. State (2001), 93 Ohio St.3d
1470, 757 N.E.2d 381. See, also, S.Ct.Prac.R. XI(4). Rather than immediately
reconsidering our holdings in DeRolph III, we first ordered a settlement conference
pursuant to S.Ct.Prac.R. XIV(6)(A). 93 Ohio St.3d 628, 758 N.E.2d 1113. On
March 21, 2002, the court-appointed master commissioner, Howard Bellman,
notified the court that mediation had not produced a resolution.
        {¶33} Courts exist as forums for the resolution of disputes. Ideally, parties
involved in litigation are able themselves to negotiate a settlement of their disputes,




                                          11
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




through mediation or otherwise. When that does not occur, it is the responsibility
of the court to render a final judgment that fully and finally disposes of the issues
presented to it. Generally, one or more litigants then feel vindicated while others
are left to accept a judgment with which they disagree. Nevertheless, the court has
done its work where the parties are able to accept the decision of the court as final,
put their dispute behind them, and proceed in accordance with the judgment.
       {¶34} Unfortunately, the majority today issues an opinion that ignores as
many questions as it decides. It thereby evades its fundamental responsibility to
resolve a dispute it agreed five years ago to resolve and leaves the citizens of Ohio
with a decision that can at best be described as ambiguous.
       {¶35} As a result, it is virtually inconceivable that today’s judgment will, in
fact, end litigation relative to the constitutionality of Ohio’s current school-funding
system. The issues will almost certainly again come before this, or another, Ohio
court. I write today in anticipation of that unfortunate eventuality. Specifically, I
write to reiterate that I do not consider dicta contained in DeRolph v. State (1997),
78 Ohio St.3d 193, 677 N.E.2d 733 (“DeRolph I”), or DeRolph v. State (2000), 89
Ohio St.3d 1, 728 N.E.2d 993 (“DeRolph II”), to constitute the law of this case or
controlling precedent.
       {¶36} Unlike the majority, I do not believe the creation of a “complete
systematic overhaul” to be the “core constitutional directive of DeRolph I,”
majority opinion at ¶ 5, nor do I believe that the General Assembly is
constitutionally required to make such an overhaul. See DeRolph III, 93 Ohio St.3d
at 312, 754 N.E.2d 1184 (“It is the law contained in the syllabi to DeRolph I and
DeRolph II and the principles established by court entry in the case at bar by which
we are required to evaluate the constitutionality of the school-funding system now
statutorily in place” [emphasis added]). Indeed, today’s majority opinion at ¶ 2
acknowledges that DeRolph I did “ ‘neither more nor less than the syllabus law




                                          12
                                  January Term, 2002




sets forth,’ ” quoting DeRolph I, 78 Ohio St.3d at 262, 677 N.E.2d 733 (Pfeifer, J.,
concurring).
        {¶37} The majority today vacates our decision in DeRolph III, replaces it
with little more than a summary proclamation of a change of “collective mind,”
declares the current school-funding system unconstitutional, and proclaims
DeRolph I and II to be the law of the case. It thereby returns the parties (and all
Ohio citizens) to the uncertain positions in which they stood two and one-half years
ago on May 11, 2000, when DeRolph II was decided, with one exception: the
majority fails to retain jurisdiction of the cause by the courts as it did after both
DeRolph I and DeRolph II. In so doing, it implicitly declares this case concluded,
yet does so without fully disposing of the issues that have developed during the
litigation.
        {¶38} The court in DeRolph I stayed the effect of its decision for 12 months
and remanded the cause to the trial court, which was granted plenary jurisdiction to
enforce that decision. Id., 78 Ohio St.3d at 213, 677 N.E.2d 733. Shortly thereafter,
this court answered in the negative the trial court’s question whether the Supreme
Court should “retain exclusive jurisdiction of the case to review all remedial
legislation enacted.” DeRolph v. State (1997), 78 Ohio St.3d 419, 678 N.E.2d 886.
        {¶39} Writing separately, I cited the general principle that “[t]ypically,
when a Supreme Court declares a legislative act to be unconstitutional it does not
order the legislative body to enact new legislation.” Nevertheless, given the
majority’s unfortunate decision on the merits in DeRolph I, I concluded that “the
most expeditious means of removing the uncertainty regarding the constitutionality
of the new plan is for this court to issue an order retaining jurisdiction in this court.”
Id., 78 Ohio St.3d at 422, 678 N.E.2d 886 (Moyer, C.J., dissenting).                 This
conclusion was based on my recognition that “uncertainty will envelop all aspects
of public school funding in our state until the day this court deems a new funding
system to be constitutional.” Id. at 423, 678 N.E.2d 886 (Moyer, C.J., dissenting).




                                           13
                              SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




        {¶40} When the deadline for compliance in DeRolph I had passed, the
majority in DeRolph II again continued the case, for yet another year, until June 15,
2001. 89 Ohio St.3d at 38, 728 N.E.2d 993. This time, however, the court retained
jurisdiction, in anticipation of further briefing in this court at that time.
        {¶41} Today, however, the majority says nothing concerning enforcement
of its reaffirmed declaration that the current school-funding system is
unconstitutional. It neither retains jurisdiction in this court nor remands the cause
to the trial court. More than five years after DeRolph I, the majority today switches
course by implicitly holding that a declaration of unconstitutionality, standing
alone, adequately resolves the dispute before us.
        {¶42} I believe that the majority, having twice ordered deadlines for
compliance with its judgments, raised the expectation that it would ultimately
render a decision that would be final. Had the majority chosen the more traditional
course in 1997, it would now be acting consistently in simply declaring the system
unconstitutional.    But too much energy and too many resources have been
expended, and the state has made too much progress, for the court now to excuse
itself from the process. That is the reason I believe we should modify our decision
in DeRolph III, resolve the issues, and terminate the role assumed by this court in
creating public policy.
        {¶43} The majority today directs the General Assembly to “enact a school-
funding scheme that is thorough and efficient, as explained in DeRolph I, DeRolph
II, and the accompanying concurrences.” Supra at ¶ 5. I do not believe that the
opinions in DeRolph I and II provide the General Assembly with clear guidance. I
certainly do not believe that the opinions of individual members of the court as
reflected in separate concurrences are binding in any litigation that may follow
today’s decision.
        {¶44} The majority has yet to define what it means by “overreliance” on
property tax, and Ohio’s policymakers are left to wonder, “If the percentage of local




                                           14
                                 January Term, 2002




to state funding were inverted would that be sufficient, or is the majority seeking only
a fifty-one-percent reliance on state funds?” Id., 89 Ohio St.3d at 52, 728 N.E. 2d 993
(Moyer, C.J., dissenting). As guidance, the majority offers the observation that the
General Assembly has done no more than merely “nibbl[e] at the edges” of the current
system. Supra at ¶ 5. The infusion of billions of additional dollars into the public
school system of this state in the last ten years, as demonstrated in the record before
us, constitutes significantly more than “nibbling” at the edges or elsewhere.
       {¶45} DeRolph I and II do not require the elimination of all qualitative
differences among the state’s local schools. This court has recognized in DeRolph I
and II, and in other decisions in this cause, that communities that so choose may
supplement their educational programs beyond minimum requirements. DeRolph I,
78 Ohio St.3d at 211, 677 N.E.2d 733; DeRolph II, 89 Ohio St.3d at 27-28, 728 N.E.2d
993. DeRolph I and II held that the funding system violates the Thorough and
Efficient Clause of the Ohio Constitution; they did not hold that it violates the Equal
Protection Clause. DeRolph I, 78 Ohio St.3d at 202, 677 N.E.2d 733, at fn. 5;
DeRolph v. State (1998), 83 Ohio St.3d 1212, 699 N.E.2d 518.
       {¶46} Nor do DeRolph I and II require the elimination of a statewide system
of school funding based on property tax. Despite the majority’s reliance on statements
of individual members of the 1851 Constitutional Convention, historically, “[l]ocal
property taxes have funded Ohio schools since 1825—before the adoption of the
Education Clause.” (Emphasis sic.) DeRolph I, 78 Ohio St.3d at 265, 677 N.E.2d 733
(Moyer, C.J., dissenting). They have constituted a major source of school funding
ever since. To the extent that the majority’s original finding of unconstitutionality in
DeRolph I was based on indefensible deficiencies then existing in some public school
facilities, arguably supporting the contention that the local-property-based system
then in place violated the Thorough and Efficient Clause, those conditions have been,
or are being, ameliorated by the massive infusion of state funds into the public school
system since this action was originally filed. DeRolph I was centered on the




                                          15
                              SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




establishment of a floor of adequacy—a basic educational opportunity, as
contemplated in Miller v. Korns (1923), 107 Ohio St. 287, 140 N.E. 773, and
Cincinnati School Dist. Bd. of Edn. v. Walter (1979), 58 Ohio St.2d 368, 12 O.O.3d
327, 390 N.E.2d 813.
        {¶47} Despite today’s decision, I fear that the weight of DeRolph v. State will
continue to burden not only each of the three branches of state government, but also
the school districts and school children the majority decision purports to be helping,
as well as other recipients of state tax dollars, e.g., Ohio’s public institutions of
higher education.
                                           II
                       Proposed Modification of DeRolph III
        {¶48} As a justice of this court, it is my responsibility to respect and follow
its decisions, even those with which I disagree. Our legal system relies on doctrines
such as stare decisis and the law of the case to provide consistency in the application
of the law. See Nolan v. Nolan (1984), 11 Ohio St.3d 1, 3, 11 OBR 1, 462 N.E.2d
410 (“the decision of a reviewing court in a case remains the law of that case on the
legal questions involved for all subsequent proceedings in the case at both the trial and
reviewing levels”). Without consistency, the law risks the appearance of caprice.
        {¶49} It is not unusual for me to join a judgment that is based on a decision
with which I initially strongly disagreed. E.g. Ford v. Talley Mach. Co. (1994), 68
Ohio St.3d 473, 474, 628 N.E.2d 1351 (Moyer, C.J., concurring). As early as one
month after DeRolph I, I noted the precedential import of that decision. Writing
separately in the court’s disposition of the state’s motion for reconsideration and
clarification, I recognized that a majority of this court had ordered the legislative
branch of our state government to adopt new school-funding legislation within a year,
observing that “[e]ven those who disagree with the judgment of the court recognize
that it is their constitutional duty to respond constructively to it.” DeRolph v. State
(1997), 78 Ohio St.3d 419, 423, 678 N.E.2d 886 (Moyer, C.J., concurring in part and




                                           16
                                  January Term, 2002




dissenting in part). Accord State ex rel. Taft v. Franklin Cty. Court of Common Pleas
(1998), 81 Ohio St.3d 1244, 1247, 691 N.E.2d 677 (Moyer, C.J., concurring) (“I
concur in the entry in this case because it is consistent with the views expressed in my
separate opinion in [DeRolph v. State (1997), 78 Ohio St.3d 419, 678 N.E.2d 886], is
consistent with the spirit underlying the majority opinions in [earlier DeRolph
decisions], and is consistent with the best interests of the people of the state of Ohio”);
DeRolph v. State (2001), 91 Ohio St.3d 1274, 1276, 747 N.E.2d 823 (“The merit issue
is now the law of the case as established by the majority”).
        {¶50} In DeRolph III, we concluded that “[i]t is the law contained in the
syllabi to DeRolph I and DeRolph II and the principles established by court entry
in the case at bar by which we are required to evaluate the constitutionality of the
school-funding system now statutorily in place.” 93 Ohio St.3d at 312, 754 N.E.2d
1184.     Our conclusion was consistent with my past judicial practice of
acknowledging the law established in prior decisions and was reached in the hope
that DeRolph III would extricate the court from the circumstances created by a
majority of the court. I believed that approach to be consistent with my duty to
this court and to the citizens this court serves.
        {¶51} In DeRolph III, a majority of this court found that the General
Assembly had, in the ten years since this case began, crafted significant legislation
to address and correct egregious conditions in the poorest of Ohio schools. It
recognized that these conditions, upon which this court’s original finding of
unconstitutionality in DeRolph I was based, had been largely ameliorated by
programs to remedy severe building deterioration and perceived funding inequities.
Id., 93 Ohio St.3d at 323, 754 N.E.2d 1184. We concluded that certain relatively
minor modifications to the funding plan adopted by the General Assembly still
needed to be made, but acknowledged that these changes would “not require
structural changes to the school foundation program set forth in R.C. Chapter
3317.” Id. at 325, 754 N.E.2d 1184.




                                            17
                            SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




       {¶52} The state urges us to reconsider our holdings (1) that wealth screens
may not be used in the state’s school-funding foundation formula and (2) that the
changes to the foundation formula ordered in DeRolph III should be retroactively
applied as of July 1, 2001. I would modify DeRolph III as discussed below.
                                         A
                            Inaccuracies in the Record
       {¶53} In explaining our grant of a motion for reconsideration of DeRolph
III, we noted, “Both sides acknowledge * * * that the evidence and one of the briefs
filed in DeRolph III contained inaccurate analysis regarding the cost of funding the
base cost formula with wealth screens eliminated.” DeRolph v. State (2001), 93
Ohio St.3d 628, 631, 758 N.E.2d 1113. The court should now acknowledge the
deficiencies in the record before us at the time DeRolph III was decided and respond
in a constructive manner to preserve the goal of DeRolph III, that being extrication
of the judiciary from the policy-making role it wrongfully assumed in its earlier
DeRolph decisions.
                                         B
                                  Wealth Screens
       {¶54} We noted in DeRolph III that the General Assembly, in 2001
Am.Sub.H.B. No. 94 (“H.B. 94”), determined the base cost of an adequate
education to be $4,814 per student in fiscal year 2002. 93 Ohio St.3d at 313, 754
N.E.2d 1184. In arriving at that figure, the General Assembly began by using “the
unweighted average cost per student of educating students enrolled in selected
districts,” excluding the richest and poorest: “Under the new law, this selection
began with one hundred seventy school districts that, in fiscal year 1999, met at
least twenty of twenty-seven performance standards established by H.B. 94. R.C.
3317.012(B)(1)(a) through (aa). Districts in the top and bottom five percent of
income and property wealth bases are deleted to adjust for anomalies within those
districts, leaving one hundred twenty-seven model districts.” Id.




                                        18
                                      January Term, 2002




         {¶55} The parties use the term “wealth screens” to refer to the process of
eliminating the top and bottom 5 percent of schools from the group of schools
whose costs are averaged to determine base per-pupil cost. We held in DeRolph III
that the per-pupil base cost formula “must be modified to include the top five
percent districts and the lower five percent districts,” thereby ordering the
elimination of wealth screens from the process by which per-pupil base cost is
determined. Id. at 324, 754 N.E.2d 1184.
         {¶56} Elimination of wealth screens would result in the inclusion of several
school districts whose per-pupil spending is unusually high. In their brief filed in
DeRolph III, the plaintiffs-appellees imputed ulterior motives to the General
Assembly in incorporating wealth screens into the foundation formula, describing
their use as an arbitrary manipulation to artificially lower the per-pupil base cost.
See 93 Ohio St.3d at 332-333, 754 N.E.2d 1184 (Douglas, J., concurring). In
contrast, the state contends that the use of wealth screens is wholly justifiable, in
that “inclusion of data from the top and bottom five percent of districts has a
dramatic effect and distorts the base cost calculation.” In other words, the state
argues that inclusion of the top and bottom 5 percent of school districts skews the
average.
         {¶57} In support of its motion for reconsideration, the state has provided us
with convincing evidence1 in support of its contention that “the use of wealth
screens is standard practice throughout school finance and the discipline of statistics
generally.” It has provided us ample justification, more persuasively presented than
in the briefs on the merits, for rejecting the proposition that the General Assembly’s



1. The procedural posture of this case is unique; since DeRolph II there has not been a traditional
record of facts produced in a trial court. It is appropriate that we accept supplementary evidence
such as the affidavits of experts submitted by both parties. See DeRolph v. State (2001), 91 Ohio
St.3d 1274, 1275, 747 N.E.2d 823 (“DeRolph is not a traditional appeal, in which the court has a
previously established record available for review. Rather, DeRolph has become a hybrid which
will require this court to engage both in factfinding and application of law to those facts * * * ”).




                                                 19
                               SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




adoption of wealth screens was merely an attempt to artificially lower the final per-
pupil base cost, that it evidences unlawful “residual budgeting,” or that it was
otherwise purely arbitrary. The record contains expert testimony from both sides
supporting the use of wealth screens as an appropriate means of determining per-
pupil base cost, as follows:
         William Driscoll, an expert for the plaintiffs-appellees, testified in a
deposition that he agreed with a report that stated, “Standard statistical analyses
typically use 5% to estimate the tails at either end of a distribution. In this case, the
tails or extreme observations do fall, in fact, in approximately the lowest and
highest 5% of the range.”
         David Monk, an expert for the state and Dean of the College of Education
at the Pennsylvania State University, testified in an affidavit that a “5% exclusion
of this kind is a well established practice within the field of school finance given
the common existence of highly atypical school districts in the tails of wealth and
income distributions.” Dean Monk stated that the General Assembly’s “decision
to use a version of the observed best practices method as the basis for its estimation
of the cost of an adequate education presumes the availability of a standard that is
relevant to the affected districts. * * * The purpose of the 5 percent exclusion rule
is to remove highly atypical districts and to thereby preserve the spirit as well as
the integrity of the standard.”
         Dr. John Augenblick, an expert consulted by the General Assembly during
its legislative deliberations, testified at trial in 1998 that the spending by Ohio
school districts within the top and bottom 5 percent based on wealth was atypical
and should not be included in the averaging process. Dr. Augenblick testified that
wealthy districts falling in the upper 5 percent of spending “provide things that go
well beyond what you might think are kind of the basic or adequate services.”
           Wendy Zahn, a senior budget analyst for the Legislative Service
Commission, stated that it is important to reduce the effects of the extremes of a




                                           20
                                  January Term, 2002




distribution when data distribution is not normal and that “a widely used method
for eliminating outliers” is to use the 5th percentile to the 95th percentile.
           Dr. William I. Notz, professor of statistics at the Ohio State University,
stated:
          “If the mean of a set of data with the most extreme values removed differs
markedly from the mean computed using all the data, the extreme values would be
considered outliers. In such a case, standard practice is to consider the trimmed
mean as more representative [of] the center of the data.
          “Data such as income and property values typically contain outliers and it
is not surprising that the school district expenditure data shows evidence of outliers.
If data from all school districts meeting the 20-27 standards are used, the base cost
(average expenditures per pupil) is $5,032. Inflated to FY02 values, this number
becomes $5,467. If the same quantity is computed after deleting the wealthiest 5%
and poorest 5% of the districts, and is inflated to FY02 values, this number (a
trimmed mean) becomes $5,023. This would be considered a marked difference
and the trimmed mean ($5,023) would be considered more representative of a
typical value.” (Emphasis added.)
          {¶58} The plaintiffs-appellees remain adamantly opposed to the use of an
“inferential methodology” based on model school districts to derive a foundation
formula for funding public education. Wealth screens are one aspect of such a
funding approach. However, the General Assembly—not the plaintiffs-appellees
or this court—remains the entity constitutionally charged with the responsibility of
establishing a thorough and efficient system of common schools. As recognized
by the majority in DeRolph II, 89 Ohio St.3d at 18, 728 N.E.2d 993, “deciding what
methodology to adopt is a policy determination.”
          {¶59} There is nothing inherently unconstitutional in the method chosen by
the General Assembly. Moreover, both the state and the plaintiffs-appellees have
acknowledged that “the evidence and one of the briefs filed in DeRolph III




                                           21
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




contained inaccurate analysis regarding the cost of funding the base cost formula
with wealth screens eliminated.” 93 Ohio St.3d at 631, 758 N.E.2d 1113.
       {¶60} Upon reconsideration, and specifically in view of the fact that we had
been provided inaccurate data at the time DeRolph III was decided, I believe our
decision should be modified pursuant to S.Ct.Prac.R. XI. I am persuaded that the
General Assembly’s incorporation of wealth screens in determining the school
foundation formula is acceptable. Accordingly, I would modify our opinion in
DeRolph III to allow the exclusion of the top and bottom 5 percent of school
districts in the calculation of per-pupil base costs as required by H.B. 94.




                                         22
                                January Term, 2002




                                          C
                        Effective Date of Formula Changes
       {¶61} Our order in DeRolph III required that changes to the foundation
formula be applied retroactively to July 1, 2001. 93 Ohio St.3d at 324, 754 N.E.2d
1184. The state argues that this aspect of our decision “contrasts sharply with the
Court’s prior decisions in this case and the practical considerations they recognize,
as well as other precedent under the Ohio Constitution.”
       {¶62} We are now well into the second year of the financial biennium that
began on July 1, 2001. The state contends that any changes to the foundation
formula ordered by this court will require time to implement and that economic
circumstances have changed in the state since DeRolph III was announced. I agree
that the effective date prescribed by DeRolph III is no longer realistic. Moreover,
the further July 1, 2001, recedes into the past, the more likely it is that retroactive
application of DeRolph III to that date would result in a one-time infusion of
additional funds unconnected to the current budgets of school districts.
       {¶63} Upon reconsideration, I believe that the changes to the school
foundation formula ordered in DeRolph III, modified as stated herein, should be
implemented effective July 1, 2003, and applied to the subsequent years designated
in R.C. 3317.012(A)(1).
                                          D
                                      Summary
       {¶64} I would hold that wealth screening of school districts as mandated by
H.B. 94 may be used in determining per-pupil base cost for purposes of the school
foundation formula. I would also reaffirm our decision in DeRolph III that the state,
having elected to retain a foundation program based on the average spending of
selected districts, must determine that base cost by using only those school districts
meeting the performance standards set by R.C. 3317.012(B)(1)(a) through (aa)
without rounding to include additional lower-spending districts and without




                                          23
                             SUPREME COURT OF OHIO




adjusting for the echo effect, effective July 1, 2003. Cf. DeRolph III, 93 Ohio St.3d
at 324-325, 754 N.E.2d 1184.
        {¶65} Our decision in DeRolph III should otherwise be reaffirmed,
including our holding that the parity aid program established by the General
Assembly must be fully funded not later than July 1, 2003. Id. at 325, 754 N.E.2d
1184.
                                __________________
        COOK, J., dissenting.
        {¶66} For the reasons I have expressed throughout this court’s
consideration of this cause, the court should dismiss this case. See DeRolph v. State
(2001), 93 Ohio St.3d 309, 380-383, 754 N.E.2d 1184 (Cook, J., dissenting).
                                __________________
        Bricker & Eckler, L.L.P., Nicholas A. Pittner, John F. Birath Jr., Sue W.
Yount, Quintin F. Lindsmith and Susan B. Greenberger, for appellees.
        Betty D. Montgomery, Attorney General, Mary Lynn Readey, Roger F.
Carroll and James G. Tassie, Assistant Attorneys General, for appellants.
                                __________________




                                         24
