DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND WORKFORCE
I. School finance
  Funding for FY 2026 and FY 2027
    ▪ Extends, with changes, the operation of the school financing system established in 2021
        by H.B. 110 of the 134th General Assembly and the payment of temporary transitional aid
        and the formula transition supplement.
    ▪ Requires the Department of Education and Workforce to pay both of the following
        supplements in each of FY 2026 and FY 2027 to city, local, and exempted village school
        districts:
            An enrollment growth supplement to each district that experienced a specified
             percentage of growth in enrolled ADM between specified fiscal years; and
            A per-pupil performance supplement to each district that received a specified
             performance rating on the most recently issued state report card.
    ▪ Requires the Department to pay a base funding supplement in each of FY 2026 and
        FY 2027 to each school district, STEM school, and community school.
    ▪ Requires the Department to adjust the economically disadvantaged average daily
        membership (ADM) used to calculate disadvantaged pupil impact aid (DPIA) for FY 2026
        and FY 2027 for each school district, community school, and STEM school so that the ADM
        is weighted to be partially based on both:
            The economically disadvantaged ADM reported in the district or school in FY 2025;
             and
            The ADM of students certified as categorically eligible for a free meal under federal
             law in the fiscal year for which DPIA is calculated.
  DPIA plan partners
    ▪ Qualifies a community mental health prevention provider as one of the entities with
        which a school district, community school, or STEM school may develop its plan for using
        its DPIA.
  Career-technical education associated services funds
    ▪ Modifies the purposes for which school districts may use career-technical education
        associated services funds.
  Career awareness and exploration funds
    ▪ Permits the lead district of a career-technical planning district to use career awareness
        and exploration funds to provide mentorship opportunities for students to learn about
        careers and workforce skills.
    ▪ Requires the lead district of each career-technical planning district receiving career
        awareness and exploration funds to report on the use of those funds to the Department.

P a g e | 203                                                                                H.B. 96
                                                                                       Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                LSC                            Legislative Budget Office



  Quality Community and Independent STEM School Support
  Programs
    ▪ Codifies the Quality Community School Support Program and the Quality Independent
        STEM School Support Program.
  Facilities funding for community and STEM schools
    ▪ Codifies the per-student facilities payment for community schools or STEM schools.
  Community and STEM school special education threshold cost pool
    ▪ Establishes a separate threshold special education cost pool for community schools and
        STEM schools.
    ▪ Requires the Department to withhold an amount equal to 5% of each community school’s
        and STEM school’s special education funding for the pool, subject to any funding
        limitations enacted by the General Assembly.
    ▪ Requires the Department to redistribute any unused funds withheld for the new pool for
        FY 2026 and FY 2027 to community schools and STEM schools in the same proportion that
        the funds were originally contributed.
  Auxiliary services funding
    ▪ Permits a chartered nonpublic school to use auxiliary services funds to provide diagnostic
        and therapeutic mental health services and to hire retired Ohio peace officers as security
        officers.
  Payment for districts with decreases in utility TPP value
    ▪ Requires the Department to make a payment, for FYs 2026 and 2027, to each city, local,
        exempted village, or joint vocational school district that has at least one power plant
        within its territory and that experiences a 10% or greater decrease in the taxable value of
        utility tangible personal property (TPP) and an overall negative change in TPP subject to
        taxation.
II. State scholarships
  Autism and Jon Peterson Special Needs scholarships
    ▪ Increases the maximum amount of an Autism Scholarship and a JPSN Scholarship from
        $32,445 to $34,000.
    ▪ Increases the categorical amounts for a JPSN Scholarship.
    ▪ Qualifies for a scholarship a child who is enrolled in a chartered or nonchartered
        nonpublic school, is home educated, or is older than compulsory school age and younger
        than 22 and is still eligible to receive transition services under the child’s IEP.
    ▪ Permits multiple alternative public or registered private providers to be contracted to
        provide services to implement an IEP or education plan.


P a g e | 204                                                                                 H.B. 96
                                                                                        Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                 LSC                            Legislative Budget Office



    ▪ Specifies that intervention services, educational services, academic services, tutoring
        services, aide services, and other related special education services may be provided
        virtually.
    ▪ Prohibits a qualified special education child who participates in JROTC maintained by the
        child’s resident school district from being considered enrolled in that district for
        determining eligibility for an Autism or JPSN scholarship
    ▪ Clearly states that a child is eligible under the Autism Scholarship if that child is at least
        age three and younger than 22.
    ▪ Expands the individuals who may apply for a scholarship on behalf of a special education
        child and perform certain other duties regarding the child’s participation in the Autism
        Scholarship Program.
    ▪ Expands eligibility for the JPSN Scholarship to three- and four-year-olds.
    ▪ Requires the Department to maintain a list of Autism and JPSN scholarship registered
        private providers and their locations on its publicly accessible website.
  Nonchartered Educational Savings Account Program (VETOED)
    ▪ Would have established the Nonchartered Educational Savings Account Program to
        provide eligible students with an educational savings account (ESA) beginning in the 2026-
        2027 school year (VETOED).
III. Career-technical education
  Waivers for middle school career-technical education
    ▪ Requires all school districts to provide career-technical education to 7th and 8th graders
        on and after July 1, 2026, by eliminating waivers from that obligation.
  Approval deadlines for career-technical programs
    ▪ Eliminates the application and approval deadlines for new career-technical education
        programs.
  Career-Technical Assurance Guides (CTAG)
    ▪ Adds CTAG-aligned courses to the types of programs that may be considered an
        “advanced standing program” at school districts, other public schools, and chartered
        nonpublic schools.
    ▪ Requires each district and school that has students enrolled in CTAG-aligned career-
        technical courses to implement a policy for grading and calculating class standings for
        those courses in a manner that is equivalent to the district or school’s policy for its other
        advanced standing programs.




P a g e | 205                                                                                  H.B. 96
                                                                                         Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                 LSC                           Legislative Budget Office



  Industry-recognized credentials
    ▪ Eliminates the requirement for the Director of Education and Workforce’s industry-
        recognized credentials and licenses committee to establish a point value system for
        credentials to help determine whether a student qualifies for a high school diploma.
    ▪ Requires the Director’s committee to instead establish criteria under which a student may
        use industry-recognized credentials to help qualify for a high school diploma.
IV. Assessments, instruction, and tutoring
  Diagnostic assessment
    ▪ Requires the Department, by June 30, 2026, to adopt a diagnostic assessment for reading
        for each of grades K-3 and approve a list of up to five diagnostic assessments aligned with
        the state academic standards for each of grades K-3 for both reading and math.
    ▪ Requires the diagnostic assessment for reading to be designed to measure student
        comprehension of foundational reading skills aligned to the science of reading.
    ▪ Requires public schools to administer the diagnostic assessments to their students by
        September 30 of each year, beginning with the 2026-2027 school year.
  Kindergarten readiness assessment
    ▪ Requires public schools to administer the kindergarten readiness assessment (KRA) to
        each kindergarten student between July 1 of the school year in which the student enrolls
        in kindergarten and the 20th day of instruction of that school year.
    ▪ Requires public schools to utilize and score the KRA in accordance with rules established
        by the Department of Children and Youth.
    ▪ Eliminates KRA data on the state report cards.
  State assessments as public records
    ▪ Eliminates the requirement that 40% of state assessment questions be made a public
        record and instead requires the Department to determine which questions, if any, are to
        be public record.
  College-Level Examination Program (CLEP)
    ▪ Adds the College-Level Examination Program (CLEP) to the programs that may be
        considered an advanced standing program at public and chartered nonpublic schools.
    ▪ Adds passing scores on the CLEP exams as a demonstration of post-secondary readiness
        on the state report card and as a qualification for the college-ready, citizenship, science,
        and technology diploma seals.




P a g e | 206                                                                                  H.B. 96
                                                                                         Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                 LSC                           Legislative Budget Office



  Core curriculum and evidence-based reading programs
    ▪ Narrows the requirement for a public school to use core curriculum and instructional
        materials in English language arts from the Department’s approved list by applying it only
        to curricula and materials for students in grades pre-K-5.
    ▪ Expressly requires a public school to use evidence-based reading intervention programs
        from the Department’s approved list for students in grades pre-K-12.
  Advanced math learning opportunities
    ▪ Requires school districts to provide advanced math learning opportunities to students
        who achieve an advanced level of skill on either a math achievement assessment or an
        end-of-course exam.
    ▪ Exempts school districts from providing advanced math learning opportunities if the
        district does not offer any of those opportunities in the grade level in which the student
        is enrolled for the next school year.
    ▪ Requires districts to notify the parent or guardian of a student who qualifies for advanced
        math learning opportunities and permits the parent or guardian to opt the student out of
        them.
  High-dosage tutoring
    ▪ Permits a public school to incorporate high-dosage tutoring into a student’s regular
        instruction time for each student on reading improvement and monitoring plans.
    ▪ Requires a locally approved high-dosage tutoring program to align with best practices
        identified by the Department.
  High-quality tutoring programs
    ▪ Requires the Department’s request for qualifications for high-quality tutoring programs
        to include a request for program efficacy data or other evidence of program effectiveness
        for participating students.
    ▪ Requires the Department to remove from the high-quality tutoring program list any
        program that is not aligned to the Science of Reading or that uses a three-cueing
        approach.
    ▪ Requires the Department, at least every three years, to update and provide an
        opportunity for entities to submit their qualifications for consideration to be included on
        the list.
  Financial literacy instruction exemptions
    ▪ Permits a public or chartered nonpublic school to adopt a policy to excuse from the
        financial literacy instruction graduation requirement each student who, during high
        school, participates in a financial literacy program offered through the student branch of
        a credit union or by a bank.


P a g e | 207                                                                                 H.B. 96
                                                                                        Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                 LSC                           Legislative Budget Office



V. Educators
  Use of seniority in teacher assignments
    ▪ Prohibits the use of seniority or continuing contract status as the primary factor when
        assigning teachers and instead requires assignment on the basis of the best interests of
        students.
    ▪ Specifies that the provisions pertaining to teacher assignment prevail over conflicting
        provisions of collective bargaining agreements entered into on or after September 30,
        2025.
  Science of Reading professional development
    ▪ Requires the Department to maintain an introductory Science of Reading training course
        and develop a competency-based training course that updates and reinforces educators’
        knowledge in the Science of Reading.
    ▪ Requires each teacher, administrator, or speech-language pathologist employed by a
        public school to complete the Department’s Science of Reading training by a specified
        date dependent upon when the individual was hired, and every five years thereafter.
  Educator in-service training
    ▪ Requires each public school to develop its own youth suicide awareness and prevention
        in-service educator training curriculum, instead of adopting or adapting curriculum
        developed by the Department.
    ▪ Eliminates the express authorization for a public school to have child sexual abuse in-
        service training for educators provided by law enforcement officers or prosecutors, and
        instead requires a school to develop its own curriculum in consultation with public or
        private agencies.
  Computer science educator licensure
    ▪ Makes permanent an exception set to expire after the 2024-2025 school year that permits
        a licensed educator who completes specified professional development to teach
        computer science without otherwise being licensed in that subject area.
  Cap on school district administrative expenses
    ▪ Prohibits any school district from using more than 15% of its annual operating budget on
        administrative salaries and benefits and other costs associated with the district’s
        administrative offices.
VI. Community schools
  High-performing community school definition
    ▪ Revises the definition of “high-performing community school” in the law regarding the
        right of first refusal to purchase school district property and the involuntary disposition
        of school district property.


P a g e | 208                                                                                 H.B. 96
                                                                                        Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                  LSC                             Legislative Budget Office



  Dropout prevention and recovery community schools
    ▪ Narrows the application of law regarding community schools that specialize in students
        enrolled in dropout prevention and recovery programs to only apply to schools that meet
        certain requirements established in the act.
  Sponsor evaluations
    ▪ Excludes all community schools whose contracts were not renewed or terminated by their
        sponsors before the sponsor’s evaluation from the calculation of that evaluation’s
        academic performance component.
    ▪ Eliminates the Department’s authority to permit a peer review of a sponsor’s adherence
        to quality practices component on its evaluation.
    ▪ Requires the Department to evaluate sponsors that receive an “exemplary” rating every
        five full school years and sponsors with a rating of “effective” every three full school years,
        rather than requiring both to be evaluated once every three years under prior law.
    ▪ Qualifies “exemplary” sponsors for specified continuing law incentives rather than
        requiring an “exemplary” rating for the two most recent school years.
    ▪ Prohibits the Department from including Alternative Education Academy in the academic
        component calculation of the sponsor evaluation for the Office of Ohio School
        Sponsorship for the 2025-2026 and 2026-2027 school years, but includes the school in
        that component if the Office continues to sponsor it after 2026-2027.
  Community school opening assurances
    ▪ Reduces from ten to five the number of days prior to opening for its first year of operation
        or first year of operation from a new building that a community school sponsor must
        provide prescribed assurances to the Department.
    ▪ Requires a community school sponsor that adds to an existing location, or an e-school
        that changes its location or adds a satellite location, to provide the prescribed assurances
        at least one day prior to operation in the new facility.
  Multiple facilities
    ▪ Permits any community school to be located in multiple facilities in more than one school
        district under the same contract.
  Contracts and comprehensive plans
    ▪ Eliminates the requirement that each community school submit a comprehensive plan to
        its sponsor and instead requires the plan’s provisions be included in the contract between
        the school’s sponsor and governing authority.
  Classical schools and assessment administration
    ▪ Permits a classical school to generally administer state assessments in a paper format.


P a g e | 209                                                                                    H.B. 96
                                                                                           Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                 LSC                          Legislative Budget Office



  Community school FTE reporting
    ▪ Extends through the 2025-2026 school year the option of certain community schools to
        report their student enrollment on a full-time equivalent basis based partially on credits
        earned.
VII. School policies
  Absence intervention, truancy, and chronic absenteeism
    ▪ Modifies the process school districts, brick-and-mortar community schools, and STEM
        schools must follow when addressing student absences.
    ▪ Removes whether a student has missed 10% or more of the school year as a condition for
        determining if that student is subject to grade level retention.
    ▪ Eliminates the timeline under which a school district attendance officer must file a
        complaint and instead bases the filing solely on whether a student is making satisfactory
        progress in improving attendance.
    ▪ Excuses a high school student enrolled in a school district to attend a driver education
        course.
  Student cellphone use
    ▪ Requires each public school to generally prohibit the use of cellphones by students during
        instructional hours.
  Artificial intelligence policies
    ▪ Requires the Department to adopt a model policy by December 31, 2025, on the use of
        artificial intelligence in schools.
    ▪ Requires public schools to adopt a policy by July 1, 2026, on the use of artificial
        intelligence.
  Religious instruction released time policy
    ▪ Requires a school district to permit students to attend a released time course in religious
        instruction for at least one period a week.
    ▪ Limits student attendance in such a course to no more than two periods per week for
        elementary or middle school students and two units of high school credit per week for
        high school students.
    ▪ Requires school districts to permit students to bring external educational and program
        materials from a released time course into school.
  Interdistrict open enrollment policies
    ▪ Exempts a student whose parent is an active duty member of the U.S. armed forces
        stationed in this state from any school district interdistrict open enrollment application
        deadline.


P a g e | 210                                                                                H.B. 96
                                                                                       Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                 LSC                           Legislative Budget Office



    ▪ Eliminates a district’s authority to adopt a resolution that objects to its resident students
        open enrolling into another district if the student’s home district is receiving Impact Aid
        under a repealed federal law and at least 10% of its students are included in that aid
        calculation.
VIII. Transportation
  Community school transportation consortium
    ▪ Permits the governing authorities of two or more community schools to establish a
        consortium to provide or arrange transportation to and from school for students in
        participating schools.
    ▪ Requires a consortium to act on behalf of participating schools regarding student
        transportation and to comply with any law regarding student transportation in the same
        manner as a community school.
    ▪ Requires the Department to calculate and make payments to a consortium as if it were a
        community school using combined data submitted by the consortium’s fiscal agent.
  Student transportation via mass transit system
    ▪ Requires a city, local, or exempted village school district in Montgomery County that uses
        a mass transit system to transport students to and from a community or chartered
        nonpublic school to ensure that the transfer between routes does not occur at the central
        hub for the system.
  Multifunction school activity buses
    ▪ Authorizes school districts, chartered nonpublic schools, and community schools to use a
        multifunction school activity bus to transport students between school and other
        school-related functions or activities.
    ▪ Prohibits a multifunction school activity bus from being used for student transportation
        between school and home or a designated bus stop.
    ▪ Requires a driver of a multifunction school activity bus to meet all the same standards of
        a regular school bus driver.
    ▪ Authorizes the purchase of a multifunction school activity bus in the same manner as
        other school buses.
  Student transportation workgroup
    ▪ Requires the Director of Education and Workforce to establish a workgroup on student
        transportation to monitor and review the student transportation system during the
        2025-2026 school year and develop recommendations for changes that better meet
        transportation needs.
    ▪ Requires the workgroup to conduct a study of and develop recommendations regarding
        the feasibility of a school district to transport students enrolled in a community school or


P a g e | 211                                                                                 H.B. 96
                                                                                        Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                 LSC                           Legislative Budget Office



        nonpublic school on days that the community school or nonpublic school is open for
        operation with students in attendance, but the school district is not.
    ▪ Requires the workgroup to submit a report on its findings to the Governor and General
        Assembly by June 30, 2026, and disband following the report’s submission.
  Pupil Transportation Pilot Program
    ▪ Extends the operation of the Montgomery County Pupil Transportation Pilot Program to
        the 2025-2026 and 2026-2027 school years.
  Rural Transportation Grant Program
    ▪ Creates the Rural Transportation Grant Program and requires the Department to award
        transportation grants to rural dropout prevention and recovery community schools
        where more than 75% of its students are economically disadvantaged.
  Bus purchasing grants
    ▪ Eliminates the bus purchasing grant program.
IX. Other
  State report card – Early Literacy component
    ▪ Revises the performance measure regarding the percentage of students promoted to the
        fourth grade under the Third Grade Reading Guarantee so that it is based only on students
        who attain a promotion score on the third grade English Language Arts assessment or an
        alternative assessment.
  Demand side educator employment data
    ▪ Requires the Department, beginning September 30, 2026, to annually collect public
        school employment and vacancy data and to aggregate and report that data on its public
        website.
  Competency-based adult education programs
    ▪ Eliminates the Adult Diploma Program and 22+ Adult High School Diploma Program
        effective July 1, 2026, but permits an individual enrolled in either of them to complete
        that program by June 30, 2027.
    ▪ Permits an eligible provider to establish a competency-based educational program for
        eligible individuals to earn a high school diploma beginning July 1, 2026.
    ▪ Qualifies individuals who are at least 18 years old, have officially withdrawn from school,
        and who have not received a high school diploma or certificate of high school equivalence
        to participate in a program.
    ▪ Requires the Department to award a high school diploma to enrolled individuals who
        demonstrate competency through specified activities or earn specified course credits.




P a g e | 212                                                                                 H.B. 96
                                                                                        Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                  LSC                            Legislative Budget Office



    ▪ Requires the Department to pay each provider up to $7,500 per school year for each
        enrolled individual based on the extent of the individual’s successful completion of the
        program’s diploma requirements.
  Aim Higher Pilot Program
    ▪ Establishes the Aim Higher Pilot Program to provide additional funding to JVSDs that
        operate a dropout prevention and recovery program in FY 2026.
  Ohio Code-Scholar Program
    ▪ Replaces the five-year Ohio Code-Scholar Pilot Program with a permanent program that
        outlines permissible uses of the program’s appropriation, requires an annual report, and
        designates Southern State Community College as the lead entity to expand the program.
  Payment of tuition for students in residential treatment facilities
    ▪ Assigns responsibility for paying tuition for a child who is parentally placed in a residential
        treatment facility in consultation with and upon recommendation of the OhioRISE
        Program to the school district where the child’s parent resides.
    ▪ Exempts a school district from the responsibility to pay tuition for a child who has been
        awarded a state scholarship.
  School district operational revenue and expenditure report
    ▪ Requires each school district to submit appropriations, revenue, and fund balance
        assumptions contained in the board’s budget for a fiscal year, in addition to projections
        of expenditures, revenues, and fund balances for the three succeeding fiscal years, rather
        than for five years, as under prior law.
    ▪ Requires the Department and the Auditor of State to label projections regarding property
        tax allocation as state reimbursement for property tax credits.
    ▪ Requires the Auditor of State or the Department to examine the current budget
        information and projections to determine whether a district has the potential to incur a
        deficit during the first two years of the three-year period, rather than the first three years
        of the five-year period as under prior law.
  Contracts for school district construction projects
    ▪ Extends the school district contract bidding process for planned construction projects that
        exceed the competitive bidding threshold amount from work on any “school building” to
        work on any “building or other property.”
  Participation in interscholastic athletics at a different school
    ▪ Eliminates the eligibility of students enrolled in a public or nonpublic school who are
        victims of certain qualifying offenses to participate in interscholastic athletics at a
        different school.




P a g e | 213                                                                                   H.B. 96
                                                                                          Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                 LSC                            Legislative Budget Office



    ▪ Permits a school district superintendent to allow a student enrolled in another school
        district the opportunity to participate in ice hockey as an interscholastic athletic activity
        at a school operated by the superintendent’s district under certain circumstances.
  Online learning schools
    ▪ Permits school districts to employ teachers and nonteaching employees, or to contract
        with a nonprofit or for-profit entity, to operate an online learning school.
  Public entities and preschool children with disabilities
    ▪ Requires certain public entities that serve preschool children with disabilities to adhere
        to the Step Up to Quality Program and exempts certain school districts from that
        requirement.
  Aspire Program transfer
    ▪ Transfers the Aspire Program’s administration from the Department of Higher Education
        (ODHE) to the Department of Education and Workforce (DEW) by July 1, 2026.
    ▪ Includes the standard transfer language and addresses the transfer of ODHE employees
        whose primary duties include administering the program and staff resources used to
        administer it to DEW.
    ▪ Authorizes the OBM Director to make budget and accounting changes to implement the
        program’s transfer.


I. School finance
  Funding for FY 2026 and FY 2027
   (R.C. 3314.08, 3317.011, 3317.012, 3317.014, 3317.016, 3317.017, 3317.018, 3317.019,
   3317.0110, 3317.02, 3317.021, 3317.022, 3317.024, 3317.026, 3317.0212, 3317.0213,
   3317.0215, 3317.0217, 3317.0218 (repealed), 3317.051, 3317.11, 3317.16, 3317.162,
   3317.165, 3317.20, 3317.201, 3317.25, 3317.31, and 3326.44; Sections 265.215, 265.220,
   265.230, 265.237, 265.239, and 265.450)
      Overview
        The act extends, with changes, the operation of the current school financing system to
FY 2026 and FY 2027. It also establishes three additional supplements in those fiscal years. For
city, local, and exempted village school districts: (1) an enrollment growth supplement for
districts that experienced a specified percentage of enrollment growth between certain fiscal
years and (2) a per-pupil performance supplement for districts that received specified
performance ratings on the state report card issued for the 2023-2024 school year. For city, local,
exempted village, and joint vocational school districts, community schools, and STEM schools,
the act establishes a base funding supplement.
       Finally, the act requires the Department of Education and Workforce to calculate
disadvantaged pupil impact aid (DPIA) for FY 2026 and FY 2027 using a weighted economically

P a g e | 214                                                                                  H.B. 96
                                                                                         Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                 LSC                           Legislative Budget Office



disadvantaged average daily membership (ADM). That weighting is based, in part, on the number
of economically disadvantaged ADM reported in a school district, community school, or STEM
school for FY 2025, and in part on the ADM of students directly certified as economically
disadvantaged for the fiscal year for which the DPIA payment is calculated.
      School financing system calculation revisions
        The act makes the following changes to the school financing system:
       1. Increases the general phase-in and DPIA phase-in percentages from 66.67% in FY 2025
to 83.33% in FY 2026 and 100% in FY 2027;
       2. Increases the minimum transportation state share percentage from 41.67% in FY 2025
to 45.83% in FY 2026 and 50% in FY 2027;
        3. Eliminates gifted professional development funding for school districts;
       4. Reduces the per student payment amount of career awareness and exploration funds
from $10 in FY 2025 to $3 in both FY 2026 and FY 2027;
      5. Eliminates the payment of supplemental targeted assistance to city, local, and
exempted village school districts;
        6. Requires a district’s building leadership support in the base cost calculation to be
calculated using the number of school buildings in the district for the preceding fiscal year;
       7. Requires the base cost and state share percentage for joint vocational school districts
to be calculated in a similar manner to city, local, and exempted village school districts;
        8. Requires the use of data from the previous fiscal year to establish the target number
of qualifying riders per bus for each city, local, and exempted village school district;
        9. Requires the Tax Commissioner to certify the median federal adjusted gross income of
a district’s residents for use in making computations for the district, instead of the total federal
adjusted gross income of residents as under prior law;
        10. Codifies and incorporates into the system the equity supplement for community
schools that are not internet- or computer-based community schools with each such school
receiving a per student payment of $500 in FY 2026 and $400 in FY 2027; and
         11. Extends the uncodified requirement that the academic co-curricular activities,
supplies and academic content, athletic co-curricular activities, and building operations cost
components of the base cost calculation for city, local, and exempted village school districts be
based on the sum of the enrolled ADM of every district that reported data, rather than on every
district as otherwise required under continuing law.
        In addition, the act extends to FY 2026 and FY 2027 the payment of temporary transitional
aid to school districts based on an FY 2020 funding base and a formula transition supplement
based on an FY 2021 funding base to districts, community schools, and STEM schools.
        For background information on the current school financing system, see:



P a g e | 215                                                                                 H.B. 96
                                                                                        Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                       LSC                              Legislative Budget Office



        1. The LSC Final Analysis for H.B. 110 of the 134th General Assembly (PDF), which enacted
the system;
     2. The LSC Final Analysis for H.B. 583 of the 134th General Assembly (PDF), which made a
number of corrective and technical changes to it; and
        3. The LSC Final Analysis for H.B. 33 of the 135th General Assembly (PDF), which extended
the system to the FY 2025-FY 2026 biennium.53
        Enrollment growth supplement
       The act requires the Department to pay an enrollment growth supplement in FY 2026 and
FY 2027 to each city, local, and exempted village school district that experienced a prescribed
level of growth in its enrolled ADM between certain fiscal years. More specifically, the
Department must pay:
       1. $225 per student in FY 2026 to each district whose enrolled ADM grew by at least 5%
from FY 2022 to FY 2025; and
       2. $250 per student in FY 2027 to each district whose enrolled ADM grew by at least 3%
from FY 2023 to FY 2026.
        Per-pupil performance supplement
       The act requires the Department to pay a per-pupil performance supplement in FY 2026
and FY 2027 to each city, local, or exempted village school district that received specified
performance ratings on the state report card issued for the 2024-2025 school year for FY 2026,
and the 2025-2026 school year for FY 2027.
           To be eligible for the supplement, a district must have received:
           1. An overall performance rating of four “stars” or higher;
           2. A performance rating of three “stars” or higher for the Progress component; or
        3. A higher performance rating on the Progress component than the district received for
the 2023-2024 school year for FY 2026 and the 2024-2025 school year for FY 2027 (for example,
for the FY 2026 supplement, the district received a one “star” rating for the 2023-2024 school
year and a “two” star rating for the 2024-2025 school year).
         The Department must pay each eligible district a supplement equal to the product of the
district’s enrolled ADM for the fiscal year multiplied by $13 multiplied by the greater of the
number of “stars” the district received for either the overall performance rating or the Progress
component performance rating.
       The table below indicates three hypothetical examples for how a district may qualify for
the supplement and how the supplement would be calculated for the district in a school year.




53
     All final analyses are available on the General Assembly’s website: legislature.ohio.gov.

P a g e | 216                                                                                          H.B. 96
                                                                                                 Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                     LSC                              Legislative Budget Office



                                  Per-pupil performance supplement examples

                              School district A           School district B           School district C

                                                     3 “stars” or higher rating
  State report card          4 “stars” or higher                                     Improved on the
                                                          on the Progress
     criteria met               overall rating                                     Progress component
                                                            component

  The greater of the
  number of “stars”
   received for the         Overall rating – five     Progress component –        Overall Rating – two and
   overall rating or              “stars”                 three “stars”               one-half “stars”
     the Progress
      component

  Enrolled ADM for
                                      1,001                    5,693                      20,583
   the fiscal year

      Calculation                 1,001 x $13 x 5         5,693 x $13 x 3            20,583 x $13 x 2.5

   Total payment
                                     $65,065                 $222,027                  $668,947.50
      amount


      Base funding supplement
        The act requires the Department, in each of FY 2026 and FY 2027, to pay a base funding
supplement to each school district, community school, and STEM school. The supplement is
calculated on a per student basis, with the district or school receiving $27 per student in FY 2026
and $40 per student in FY 2027.
      DPIA and economically disadvantaged student count
        The act addresses how the Department must calculate DPIA for each school district,
community school, and STEM school for FY 2026 and FY 2027. Specifically, it requires the
Department to adjust the economically disadvantaged average daily membership (ADM) used to
calculate DPIA in each of those fiscal years.
        For each school district, community school that was open in FY 2025, and STEM school,
that adjustment is based on two weighted factors. The first factor is the economically
disadvantaged ADM reported in the district or school for FY 2025. The second is the economically
disadvantaged ADM in the fiscal year for which DPIA is being calculated of students who are
certified as categorically eligible for free meals under federal law. The table below indicates the
weights assigned to these factors in both fiscal years.




P a g e | 217                                                                                        H.B. 96
                                                                                               Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                    LSC                        Legislative Budget Office



                    Economically disadvantaged student ADM for FY 2026 and FY 2027

                                           FY 2026                 FY 2027

                         FY 2025
                                             75%                     65%
                         students

                          Students
                        certified as
                       categorically         25%                     35%
                      eligible for the
                         fiscal year


       For a community school that opens in FY 2026 or FY 2027, the Department must use only
the economically disadvantaged ADM of students who are certified as categorically eligible for
free meals under federal law to calculate the school’s DPIA for a fiscal year.
  DPIA plan partners
  (R.C. 3317.25)
        The act adds community mental health prevention providers to the list of entities with
which a school district, community school, or STEM school may partner in developing its plan to
use its DPIA.
  Career-technical education associated services funds
  (R.C. 3317.014)
       Under continuing law, school districts must use career-technical education associated
services funds for purposes approved by the Department. The act expressly permits the
Department to approve each of the following purposes as permissible expenses for use of those
funds:
    ▪ Engaging and collaborating with education and workforce stakeholders in the service
        area;
    ▪ Developing and maintaining a comprehensive plan to increase career-focused education
        activities;
    ▪ Ensuring that plans are informed by quality data and using data to expand access to
        career-focused activities for all students;
    ▪ Planning and allocating resources for the growth, sustainability, and enhancement of
        career-focused activities in the long term;
    ▪ Establishing continuous improvement and program approval processes.




P a g e | 218                                                                                 H.B. 96
                                                                                        Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                  LSC                             Legislative Budget Office



  Career awareness and exploration funds
  (R.C. 3317.014)
        Under law unchanged by the act, the Department pays the lead district of a career-
technical planning district (CTPD) career awareness and exploration funds to deliver relevant
career awareness and exploration programs to students within the CTPD. The act adds to the
approved uses of those funds the option for the lead district to provide mentorship opportunities
for students to learn about careers and workforce skills.
       The act also requires each lead district receiving career awareness and exploration funds
to report on the use of those funds to the Department.
  Quality Community and Independent STEM School Support
  Programs
  (R.C. 3317.27, 3317.28, and 3317.29; Section 265.350)
        The act codifies and revises the Quality Community School Support Program and Quality
Independent STEM School Support Program. Under the programs, the Department must
designate community and STEM schools as “Schools of Quality” by December 31 of each fiscal
year. The Department must pay each designated school up to $3,000 per fiscal year for each
economically disadvantaged student and up to $2,250 per fiscal year for each student who is not
economically disadvantaged. The Department must make periodic payments to each designated
school beginning in January of that fiscal year. If the appropriation for the programs is insufficient,
the act requires the Department to prorate payments so the aggregate amount appropriated is
not exceeded.
      “Community School of Quality” designation
        Under the act, to be a “Community School of Quality,” a community school must meet at
least one of the following sets of conditions:
        1. The community school meets all of the following:
          a. The school’s sponsor was rated “exemplary” or “effective” on its most recent
        evaluation;
          b. The school received a higher performance index score than the school district in
        which it is located on the two most recently issued state report cards;
            c. The school either:
             i. Received a performance rating of four stars or higher for the Progress component
            on its most recent state report card; or
              ii. Is a school where a majority of its students are either enrolled in a dropout
            prevention and recovery program operated by the school or are children with
            disabilities receiving special education and related services, and the school did not
            receive a rating for the Progress component on the most recent report card.
             d. At least 50% of the students enrolled in the school are economically disadvantaged.


P a g e | 219                                                                                    H.B. 96
                                                                                           Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                         LSC                    Legislative Budget Office



        2. The community school meets all of the following:
          a. The school’s sponsor was rated “exemplary” or “effective” on its most recent
        evaluation;
            b. The school is either:
                i. In its first year of operation; or
                ii. Opened as a kindergarten school, has added one grade per year, and has been
                in operation for less than four school years;
          c. The school is replicating an operational and instructional model used by a
        community school that qualifies as a Community School of Quality under the first set of
        conditions; and
          d. If the school has an operator, its operator received a rating of three stars or better
        on its most recent performance report.
        3. The community school meets all of the following:
       a. The school’s sponsor was rated “exemplary” or “effective” on its most recent
evaluation;
       b. The school received a higher performance index score than the school district in which
the school is located on the most recent state report card;
     c. The school received a performance rating of three stars or higher for the Progress
component on the most recent state report card; and
     d. The school received a performance rating of three stars or higher for the Achievement
component on the most recent state report card.
        4. The community school meets all of the following:
          a. The school’s sponsor was rated “exemplary” or “effective” on its most recent
        evaluation;
            b. The school satisfies either of the following:
              i. The school contracts with an operator that operates schools in other states and
            meets at least one of the following:
                I. The operator has operated a school that received a grant funded through the
            federal Charter School Program within the five years prior to the date of application or
            receiving funding from the Charter School Growth Fund;
                 II. The operator meets all of the following:
                        - One of the operator’s schools in another state performed better than the
                  school district in which the school is located;
                        - At least 50% of the total number of students enrolled in all of the
                  operator’s schools are economically disadvantaged;



P a g e | 220                                                                                  H.B. 96
                                                                                         Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                   LSC                           Legislative Budget Office



                          - The operator is in good standing in all states where it operates schools;
                  and
                        - The operator does not have any financial viability issues that would
                  prevent it from effectively operating a community school in Ohio.
              ii. The school is replicating an operational and instructional model through an
           agreement with a college or university used by a community school or its equivalent in
           another state that performed better than the school district in which it is located.
           c. The school is in its first year of operation or if replicating an operational and
        instructional model through an agreement with a college or university as described
        directly above, meets either of the following conditions:
               i. The school opened on July 1, 2022, and has not previously been designated as a
        community school of quality, in which case the first payment must be made on or before
        January 31, 2024, and be calculated based on the adjusted full-time equivalent number
        of students enrolled in the school for FY 2024; or
               ii. The school opened on or after July 1, 2019, and has not previously been
        designated as a community school of quality, in which case the first payment must be
        made within 30 days of the act’s effective date and be calculated on the adjusted full-
        time equivalent number of students enrolled in the school for the fiscal year for which
        the payment is being made.
        5. The school is a dropout prevention and recovery community school that meets all of
the following criteria:
           a. The school’s sponsor was rated “exemplary” or “effective” on the sponsor’s most
        recent evaluation;
         b. The school received an “exceeds standards” on the High School Test Passage Rate
Percentage performance indicator on the two most recent state report cards;
            c. The school is not an internet- or computer-based community school.
        A school that is designated as a Community School of Quality maintains that designation
for the two fiscal years following the fiscal year in which it is designated, except that a school
designated as such with a qualifying operator or that is an operational and instructional model
through an agreement with a college or university maintains that designation for the four fiscal
years following the fiscal year in which it was designated. Schools that are designated as
Community Schools of Quality may renew their designation each year, which extends the
designation for the two fiscal years following the renewal. Furthermore, a school that was
designated as a Community School of Quality for the first time for the 2022-2023 school year
maintains that designation through the 2029-2030 school year and may renew its designation
each year after that year.
      Merged community schools
        The act specifically qualifies for the program the surviving community school of a merger
that takes place on or after June 30, 2022, provided it otherwise qualifies as a Community School

P a g e | 221                                                                                   H.B. 96
                                                                                          Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                    LSC                        Legislative Budget Office



of Quality under one of the sets of criteria described above. Payment for these schools is
calculated using the adjusted full-time equivalent number of students enrolled in the school for
the fiscal year as of the date the payment is made, as reported by the surviving community
school, regardless of whether those students were previously enrolled in a community school
that was dissolved as part of the merger.
       Finally, the act qualifies a school dissolved under the merger that otherwise qualified for
the program to receive and retain funds received under the program before September 30, 2025.
      Independent STEM schools
        A STEM school is an “Independent STEM School of Quality” if it:
        1. Operates autonomously;
        2. Does not have a STEM school equivalent designation;
        3. Is not governed by a school district;
        4. Is not a community school;
        5. Cannot levy taxes or issue tax-secured bonds;
        6. Satisfies continuing law requirements for STEM schools; and
        7. Satisfies the requirements described in the Quality Model for STEM and STEAM Schools
established by the Department.
        Like community schools, a STEM school that is designated as an Independent STEM School
of Quality maintains that designation for the two fiscal years following the fiscal year in which it
is designated. STEM schools that were designated based on the state report cards issued for the
2017-2018 and 2018-2019 school years may renew their designation each year, which extends
the designation for the two fiscal years following the renewal.
  Facilities funding for community and STEM schools
  (R.C. 3317.31)
       The act codifies the law requiring the Department to pay an amount to each community
school and STEM school for assistance with the cost associated with facilities. The act requires
the Department to pay $25 each fiscal year for each internet- or computer-based community
school (e-school) and $1,000 each fiscal year for each student in all other community schools or
STEM schools.
         Traditionally, each main appropriations act has provided, in uncodified law, a per-student
facilities payment to community schools and STEM schools.
  Community and STEM school special education threshold cost pool
  (R.C. 3317.0215)
       The act establishes a separate threshold special education cost pool for community
schools and STEM schools and requires the Department, to withhold an amount equal to 5% of
each school’s special education funding, subject to any funding limitations enacted by the


P a g e | 222                                                                                 H.B. 96
                                                                                        Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                   LSC                             Legislative Budget Office



General Assembly to the computation of that funding. The act also requires the Department to
redistribute any unused funds withheld for the community and STEM school threshold special
education cost pool for FY 2026 and FY 2027 to community and STEM schools in the same
proportion that the funds were originally contributed.
       Former law required community schools and STEM schools to withhold 10% of special
education funding in the same pool as school districts.
  Auxiliary services funding
  (R.C. 3317.06)
        The act permits chartered nonpublic schools to use auxiliary services funds to provide
diagnostic and therapeutic mental health services to chartered nonpublic school students. It also
adds retired Ohio peace officers to the list of individuals whom a chartered nonpublic school may
hire as security officers usings auxiliary services funds.
  Payment for districts with decreases in utility TPP value
  (Section 265.240)
         The act requires the Department to make a payment, for FY 2026 and FY 2027, to each
city, local, exempted village, or joint vocational school district that has at least one power plant
within its territory and that experiences a 10% or greater decrease in the taxable value of utility
tangible personal property (TPP) and an overall negative change in TPP subject to taxation. To
qualify for the FY 2026 payment, a district must have experienced this decrease between tax
years 2017 and 2025 or tax years 2024 and 2025. To qualify for the FY 2025 payment, a district
must have experienced this decrease between tax years 2017 and 2026 or tax years 2025 and
2026.
      Eligibility determination
        The Tax Commissioner must determine which districts are eligible for this payment no
later than May 15, 2026 (for the FY 2026 payment) or May 15, 2027 (for the FY 2027 payment).
For each eligible district, the Commissioner must certify the following information to the
Department:
       1. If the district is eligible for the FY 2026 payment, its total taxable value for tax year 2025
and the change in taxes charged and payable on the district’s total taxable value for tax years
2017 and 2025; and
       2. If the district is eligible for the FY 2027 payment, its total taxable value for tax year 2026
and the change in taxes charged and payable on the district’s total taxable value for tax years
2017 and 2026; and
       3. If the district is eligible for either payment, the taxable value of the utility TPP decrease
and the change in taxes charged and payable on the change in taxable value.
      Payment amount
       The act requires the Department, for purposes of computing the payment, to replace the
three-year average valuations used in computing a district’s state education aid for FY 2019 with


P a g e | 223                                                                                     H.B. 96
                                                                                            Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                 LSC                           Legislative Budget Office



the district’s total taxable value for tax year 2025 (for the FY 2026 payment) or tax year 2026 (for
the FY 2027 payment). It then must recompute the state education aid for FY 2019 without
applying any funding limitations enacted by the General Assembly.
        The amount of a district’s payment is the greater of 1 or 2 as described below:
        1. The lesser of either:
            a. The positive difference between the district’s state education aid for FY 2019 prior
    to the recomputation and the district’s recomputed state education aid for FY 2019; or
           b. The absolute value of the change in taxes charged and payable on the district’s total
    taxable value for tax years 2017 and 2025 (for the FY 2026 payment) or for tax years 2017
    and 2026 (for the FY 2027 payment).
         2. 0.50 times the absolute value of the change in taxes charged and payable on the
district’s total taxable value for tax years 2017 and 2023 (for the FY 2026 payment) or for tax
years 2017 and 2024 (for the FY 2027 payment).
      Payment deadline
      The Department must make FY 2026 payments between June 1 and June 30, 2026, and
must make FY 2027 payments between June 1 and June 30, 2027.
      Codified law payment
       The act prohibits the Department from calculating or making a similar payment
prescribed under codified law for FYs 2026 and 2027.54
II. State scholarships
  Autism Scholarship maximum amount
  (R.C. 3317.022(A)(12))
       The act increases the maximum scholarship amount a student may receive under the
Autism Scholarship from $32,445 to $34,000.
  Jon Peterson Special Needs Scholarship amount
  (R.C. 3317.022(A)(13))
       The act increases the category amounts for a Jon Peterson Special Needs (JPSN)
Scholarship as follows:
    ▪ Increases the Category 1 amount from $2,395 to $2,855;
    ▪ Increases the Category 2 amount from $5,280 to $5,879;
    ▪ Increases the Category 3 amount from $11,960 to $12,879;
    ▪ Increases the Category 4 amount from $15,787 to $16,890;


54 R.C. 3317.028, not in the act.



P a g e | 224                                                                                 H.B. 96
                                                                                        Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                      LSC                           Legislative Budget Office



    ▪ Increases the Category 5 amount from $21,197 to $22,560; and
    ▪ Increases the Category 6 amount from $30,469 to $31,932.
        The act also increases the maximum scholarship amount from $32,445 to $34,000.
  Autism and Jon Peterson Special Needs scholarship programs
  (R.C. 3310.41, 3310.413, 3310.51, 3310.52, 3310.523, 3310.58, and 3310.64)
        The act makes the following changes to the Autism and JPSN scholarship programs:
        1. Qualifies a child for a scholarship if:
           a. The child is enrolled in a chartered or nonchartered nonpublic school, is home
    educated, or is older than compulsory school age and younger than 22 and received a home
    education and has not yet received a diploma from the child’s parent or guardian;
             b. The child is still eligible to receive transition services under the child’s IEP; and
           c. For the Autism scholarship, the child has an IEP developed that includes services
    related to autism.
             In uncodified law that is effective June 30, 2025, the act requires the Department to
    accept applications and award scholarships for the 2025-2026 school year for any child who
    is at least age 18 and younger than 22 and meets the requirements listed above.
        2. Permits multiple alternative public or registered private providers to provide services
to implement an IEP or education plan, as determined necessary and associated with educating
the child by the eligible applicant and providers.
        3. Specifies that a qualified special education child is not limited to receiving services from
a single provider for any services identified in the IEP, including a single type of service.
       4. Specifies that intervention services, educational services, academic services, tutoring
services, aide services, and other related special education services may be provided virtually.
       5. Permits a teacher or substitute teacher licensed by the State Board of Education to
provide virtual services to a qualified special education child.
        6. Adds an educational aide or assistant with a valid permit and an instructional assistant
with a valid permit in the list of professionals who can provide services under a special education
program.
       7. For billing purposes, requires services provided by a teacher or substitute teacher
licensed by the State Board to be classified as academic services and not aide services and
requires the Department to use this differentiation to simplify monthly audit procedures.
        8. Permits supervision of a qualified, credentialed provider to be conducted virtually.
         Additionally, the act prohibits a qualified special education child who participates in a
Junior Reserve Officer Training Corps program (JROTC) maintained by the child’s resident school
district from being considered enrolled in that district for purposes of determining eligibility for
an Autism or JPSN scholarship.


P a g e | 225                                                                                      H.B. 96
                                                                                             Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                 LSC                           Legislative Budget Office



  Autism Scholarship Program
       The act expands the individuals who may apply for a scholarship on behalf of a special
education child and perform certain other duties regarding the child’s participation in the Autism
Scholarship Program. Specifically, the act extends that authority to include:
       1. The guardian of a qualified special education child, when a court has appointed a
guardian for the child;
        2. The surrogate parent appointed for a qualified special education child; and
        3. A qualified special education child, if the child does not have a custodian or guardian
and is at least 18 and younger than 22.
      Qualified special education child
        The act clearly states that a child is eligible under the Autism Scholarship Program who is
at least age three and younger than 22, which is already the case under continuing law.
  Jon Peterson Special Needs scholarship program
        The act expands eligibility for the JPSN Scholarship to three- and four-year-olds.
  List of registered private providers
       The act requires the Department of Education and Workforce to maintain a list of Autism
and JPSN Scholarship registered private providers and their locations on its publicly accessible
website.
  Nonchartered educational savings account program (VETOED)
  (R.C. 3310.037, 3310.21, 3310.22, 3310.23, 3310.24, 3310.25, 3310.26, 3310.412, 3310.51,
  3313.975, 3317.02, 3317.022, 3317.03, and 5747.72)
        The Governor vetoed a provision that would have established the Nonchartered
Educational Savings Account Program to begin operating in the 2026-2027 school year for eligible
students enrolling in participating nonchartered nonpublic schools. The Treasurer of State would
have administered the program with the assistance of the Department of Education and
Workforce. Under the program, the Treasurer of State would have established an education
savings account for participating students to purchase educational goods and services, including
tuition at participating nonchartered nonpublic schools. The Department would have funded
those accounts in a manner similar to how other state scholarship programs are funded under
continuing law.
        A detailed description of the vetoed provisions is available on pages 234 to 240 of the LSC
analysis of H.B. 96, As Passed by the House (PDF), which is available on the General Assembly’s
website at legislature.ohio.gov.




P a g e | 226                                                                                 H.B. 96
                                                                                        Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                LSC                            Legislative Budget Office



III. Career-technical education
  Waivers for middle school career-technical education
  (R.C. 3313.90)
       Beginning July 1, 2026, the act eliminates waivers from a city, local, or exempted village
school district’s obligation to provide a career-technical education to seventh and eighth grade
students.
        Law in effect until that date permits a district to receive a waiver from the requirement
to provide career-techincal education to seventh and eighth grade students by annually adopting
a resolution announcing its intent to not offer career-techincal education to those grades for that
school year.
  Approval deadlines for career-technical education programs
  (R.C. 3317.161)
       The act eliminates the application and approval deadlines for a new career-technical
education program. The eliminated deadlines include:
    ▪ The March 1 deadline for the lead district of a career-technical planning district to
        approve or disapprove a school district’s, community school’s, or STEM school’s career-
        technical education program application;
    ▪ The March 15 deadline for a district or school to appeal to the Department the lead
        district’s decision or failure to take action on a career-technical education program
        application; and
    ▪ The May 15 deadline for the Department to approve or disapprove a career-technical
        education program for the next fiscal year.
       Because the May 15 deadline no longer applies, the act also eliminates the Department’s
authority to identify circumstances under which it may approve or disapprove a career-technical
education program after that former deadline.
  Career-Technical Assurance Guides
  (R.C. 3313.6013, 3313.6031, 3314.03, 3326.11, and 3328.24)
       The act adds high school courses aligned to the Chancellor of Higher Education’s Career-
Technical Assurance Guides (CTAG) to the list of programs that may be considered an “advanced
standing program” at school districts, other public schools, and chartered nonpublic schools.
Under continuing law, each district or school must provide high school students with an
opportunity to participate in advanced standing programs. Other advanced standing programs
are the College Credit Plus Program (CCP), Advanced Placement (AP) courses, International
Baccalaureate (IB) courses, and early college high school programs.
       The act also requires each district or school that has students enrolled in CTAG-aligned
courses to implement a policy for grading and calculating class standings for those courses in a
manner that is equivalent to the district’s or school’s policy for CCP, AP, IB, or honors courses.


P a g e | 227                                                                                 H.B. 96
                                                                                        Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                  LSC                           Legislative Budget Office



         Continuing law requires the Chancellor to establish criteria, policies, and procedures to
permit a student to transfer credit for qualifying career-technical courses to a state institution of
higher education from a public secondary or adult career-technical institution or another state
institution “without unnecessary duplication or institutional barriers.” This credit transfer
initiative is known as the Career-Technical Assurance Guides or “CTAG.” 55
  Industry-recognized credentials
  (R.C. 3301.17, 3313.618, 3313.6113, and 3313.6114)
        The act eliminates the requirement that the Director of Education and Workforce’s
industry-recognized credentials and licenses committee assign a point value for each of its
approved credentials and establish the total number of points that a student must earn to satisfy
certain high school graduation requirements. Instead of point values, the committee must
establish the criteria under which a student may use industry-recognized credentials to help
qualify for a high school diploma.
IV. Assessments, instruction, and tutoring
  Diagnostic assessment
  (R.C. 3301.079, 3301.0715, and 3313.608; Section 733.30)
       The act requires the Department, by June 30, 2026, to adopt diagnostic assessments in
reading and approve a list of up to five diagnostic assessments aligned with state academic
standards for both reading and math for each of grades K-3. The list of approved assessments
must include the three most widely used reading diagnostic assessments approved by the
Department for use as a comparable tool under the Third Grade Reading Guarantee prior to
September 30, 2025. The reading diagnostic assessments must be designed to measure student
comprehension of foundational reading skills aligned to the science of reading, in addition to the
requirement under continuing law that the assessments be designed to measure student
comprehension of academic content and mastery of related skills for relevant subject areas and
grade levels.
        The act eliminates:
       1. The option for high-performing public schools (school districts, community schools, and
STEM schools) to administer alternative diagnostic assessments and the authority to use an
alternative assessment to measure reading skills under the Third Grade Reading Guarantee.
        2. The requirement that adopted diagnostic assessments be aligned with the state model
curriculum and with state academic standards for first and second grade in writing and
mathematics, and for third grade in writing.
      3. The requirement that blank copies of diagnostic assessments be public records and that
upon completion of each assessment, the Department must inform each public school of its
completion and make the assessment available to that district or school.


55 See R.C. 3313.90; 3333.162, not in the act.



P a g e | 228                                                                                  H.B. 96
                                                                                         Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                 LSC                           Legislative Budget Office



        Under the act, all public schools must use the assessments adopted or approved by the
Department and must administer the diagnostic assessments by September 30 of each year,
beginning with the 2026-2027 school year. The act also eliminates the exemption from public
schools having to administer diagnostic assessments to students with significant cognitive
disabilities and, instead, requires schools to administer diagnostic assessments to such students
in accordance with guidelines adopted by the Department.
       Finally, under the act, each district and school must utilize and score each diagnostic
assessment in accordance with rules established by the Department.
  Kindergarten readiness assessment
  (R.C. 3301.0714, 3301.0715, and 3302.03)
       The act requires public schools to administer the kindergarten readiness assessment
(KRA) to each kindergarten student between July 1 of the school year in which the student enrolls
in kindergarten and the 20th day of instruction of that school year. Each school must utilize and
score the KRA in accordance with rules established by the Department of Children and Youth.
        Continuing law requires each public school to report the results of diagnostic assessments
administered to each student enrolled in grades K-3. The act eliminates an exemption from
reporting the results of kindergarten students if the student’s parent requests the school not to
report the results. It also eliminates the requirement that the Department of Education and
Workforce disaggregate the results of kindergarten students by race and socioeconomic status.
In addition, it limits the requirement that chartered nonpublic schools report KRA results so that
they only have to report them to the Department of Children and Youth, rather than both that
Department and the Department of Education and Workforce as under prior law.
       The act eliminates the requirement that the Department of Education and Workforce
include data from the kindergarten readiness assessment on the district or school’s state report
card.
  State assessments as public records
  (R.C. 3301.0711)
        Beginning with state assessments administered in the spring of the 2025-2026 school
year, the act eliminates the requirement that at least 40% of questions on the assessment used
to compute a student’s score be made a public record. Instead, the Department must determine
which questions, if any, are a public record. The act also eliminates related out-of-date provisions
that make questions on state assessments public records.
  College-Level Examination Program (CLEP)
  (R.C. 3302.03, 3313.6013, and 3313.6114)
        The act adds the College-Level Examination Program (CLEP) as a qualifier or criteria for
different programs. Those include:




P a g e | 229                                                                                 H.B. 96
                                                                                        Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                LSC                            Legislative Budget Office



       1. The list of programs that may be considered an “advanced standing program” at public
and chartered nonpublic schools. Advanced standing programs are programs that enable
students to earn credit toward a degree from a higher education institution while in high school.
        2. A passing score as demonstration of post-secondary readiness on the state report card.
       3. A passing score as qualification for the college ready, citizenship, science, and
technology diploma seals.
      The act requires that the passing score be determined by the Department of Education
and Workforce.
  Core curriculum and evidence-based reading programs
  (R.C. 3313.6028)
       The act establishes a limit on the law that requires each school district, community school,
and STEM school to only use core curriculum and instructional materials in English language arts
from a list of high-quality curricula, materials, and programs aligned to the Science of Reading
and developed by the Department. Specifically, it narrows that requirement so that it applies to
core curriculum and instructional materials for students in grades pre-K through 5.
       The act expressly requires each district or school to use evidence-based reading
intervention programs from that list for students in grades pre-K through 12.
  Advanced math learning opportunities
  (R.C. 3313.6032)
        The act requires each school district to provide each student who achieves an advanced
level of skill on either a math achievement assessment or an end-of-course exam with advanced
math learning opportunities in the following school year. An “advanced level of skill” is the
highest level on the range of scores a student may receive on those assessments or exams. If a
student takes an advanced math course, the student must take any corresponding required
achievement assessment or end-of-course exam for that course.
        Under the act, “advanced learning opportunities in math” or “advanced math course”
refers to learning opportunities or a course that provides academic content or rigor that exceeds
the standard math curriculum for the student’s grade level, including a mathematics course that
is two grade levels above the student’s current grade level.
       If a district does not offer any advanced learning opportunities in math for the grade level
in which the student is enrolled for the next school year, the act exempts that district from the
requirement.
        The act requires each district to notify the parent or guardian of a student who qualifies
for advanced math learning opportunities. A parent or guardian may submit a written request to
opt out the student from advanced math learning opportunities. If a parent or guardian submits
an opt out request, the district is not required to provide that student with advanced math
instruction.



P a g e | 230                                                                                 H.B. 96
                                                                                        Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                 LSC                           Legislative Budget Office



  High-dosage tutoring
  (R.C. 3313.608)
        The act eliminates the requirement that high-dosage tutoring provided to students on
reading improvement and monitoring plans by school districts, community schools, and STEM
schools be provided outside of the student’s regular instruction time. As a result, the act
expressly permits a district or school to incorporate high-dosage tutoring into a student’s regular
instruction time.
       The act also requires a locally approved high-dosage tutoring program to align with best
practices identified by the Department.
  High-quality tutoring program list
  (R.C. 3301.136)
       When compiling the list of high-quality tutoring vendors, continuing law requires the
Department to request the qualifications of public and private entities that provide tutoring
programs for students. The act requires those qualifications to include program efficacy data or
other evidence of program effectiveness for students who participate in the tutoring programs.
       The act requires the Department to remove immediately from the list any English
language arts tutoring program that the Department determines is not aligned to the science of
reading or that uses a three-cueing approach.
      Every three years after the initial list is posted, the Department must provide an
opportunity for entities to submit their qualifications for consideration to be included in the list
and post an updated list of tutoring programs on the Department’s website.
  Financial literacy instruction exemptions
  (R.C. 3313.603)
        The act allows a school district, other public school, or chartered nonpublic school to
adopt a policy to excuse from the financial literacy instruction graduation requirement each
student who participates in a financial literacy program offered through the student branch of a
credit union or by a bank during high school. A program must meet or exceed the state standards
and model curriculum for financial literacy and entrepreneurship instruction and a student must
participate in it for at least 60 hours of instruction to qualify for the exemption.
      Under the act, by July 1, 2026, the Department must adopt and post on its website a
model policy and guidelines for districts and schools to use in developing a policy.
V. Educators
  Use of seniority in teacher assignments
  (R.C. 3319.173)
        The act requires each school district superintendent to assign teachers to positions based
on the best interests of the district’s students. It also prohibits the superintendent from using
seniority or continuing contract status as the primary factor in assigning, reassigning, or

P a g e | 231                                                                                 H.B. 96
                                                                                        Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                 LSC                           Legislative Budget Office



transferring teachers, regardless of whether the teacher is assigned, reassigned, or transferred
voluntarily.
        Under the act, these new provisions prevail over conflicting provisions of collective
bargaining agreements entered into on or after September 30, 2025. As such, any current
collective bargaining agreements that assign teachers based on other factors, including seniority
or continuing contract status as a primary factor, are unaffected for the remainder of the
agreement’s duration.
  Science of Reading professional development
  (R.C. 3319.2310)
      Development of training course
        The act requires the Department to (1) maintain an introductory Science of Reading
training course for licensed educators and (2) develop a competency-based training course that
updates and reinforces educators’ knowledge in the Science of Reading.
      Training requirement
        The act requires each teacher, administrator, or speech-language pathologist employed
by a school district or other public school to complete the Department’s Science of Reading
training as follows:
        1. An individual hired as a teacher or administrator prior to July 1, 2025, must complete
the training by June 30, 2030, and every five years thereafter.
        2. An individual hired as a teacher or administrator on or after July 1, 2025, must complete
the training within one year after the date of hire, and every five years thereafter. However, the
act provides an exemption for individuals who either already completed that training or a similar
training or completed appropriate coursework in the Science of Reading as part of the individual’s
educator or licensure preparation program, as verified by the district or school.
      3. An individual employed as a school psychologist or speech-language pathologist must
complete the training by June 30, 2027, and every five years thereafter.
      Professional development
        The act requires local professional development committees to count Science of Reading
training towards professional development requirements for educator licensure renewal.
Additionally, a committee must permit an individual to apply any hours earned over the minimum
required hours of professional development coursework for licensure renewal to the next
renewal period for that license. Under continuing law, a district or school must establish a local
professional development committee for the purpose of determining if a teacher’s proposed
coursework meets the licensure renewal requirements set by the State Board of Education.56




56 R.C. 3319.22, not in the act.



P a g e | 232                                                                                 H.B. 96
                                                                                        Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                LSC                           Legislative Budget Office



  Educator in-service training
  (R.C. 3319.073)
      Youth suicide awareness and prevention training
        The act requires each school district or other public school to develop its own youth
suicide awareness and prevention in-service educator training curriculum instead of adopting or
adapting curriculum developed by the Department. Additionally, the act eliminates the option
for an educator to accomplish the training through self-review of suitable suicide prevention
materials approved by the district or school.
      Child sexual abuse training
        The act eliminates the express authorization for a district or school to have child sexual
abuse in-service training for educators provided by law enforcement officers or prosecutors that
have experience in handling cases involving child sexual abuse or child sexual violence. Instead,
it requires each district or school to develop its own curriculum in consultation with public or
private agencies or persons involved in child sexual abuse prevention or child sexual violence
prevention.
  Computer science teacher licensure
  (R.C. 3313.6033 (codifying Section 733.61 of H.B. 166 of the 133rd G.A.) and 3319.236)
        The act codifies and makes permanent an exception to the general requirement that an
individual be licensed in computer science to teach computer science courses. Under that
exception as amended by the act, a school district, community school, or STEM school may permit
a validly licensed educator to teach computer science in any of grades K-12, if, in the last five
years, the educator has completed an approved professional development program that provides
computer science content knowledge specific to the course the educator will teach. To continue
teaching computer science under this exception, the educator must complete the program every
five years in accordance with educator licensure recertification.
      The superintendent or principal must approve any professional development program
endorsed by the College Board, the organization that creates and administers the national
Advanced Placement exams, as appropriate for the course the educator will teach. The educator
may teach computer science only in the same district or school where the educator was
employed upon completing the professional development program.
       An individual who does not satisfy the criteria for this exception may teach a computer
science course only if the individual:
        1. Holds a valid license in computer science;
       2. Has a licensure endorsement in computer technology and a passing score in a computer
science content exam; or




P a g e | 233                                                                                H.B. 96
                                                                                       Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                   LSC                            Legislative Budget Office



       3. Has an industry professional teaching license to teach computer science for up to 40
hours per week.57
       The exception was initially enacted by H.B. 166 of the 133rd General Assembly and applied
only to the 2019-2020 and 2020-2021 school years. Subsequent main appropriations acts
extended the exception through the 2024-2025 school year.58
  Cap on school district administrative expenses
  (R.C. 3315.063)
        The act prohibits any school district board of education from using more than 15% of its
annual operating budget on administrative salaries and benefits and other costs associated with
the district’s administrative offices.
VI. Community schools
  High-performing community school definition
  (R.C. 3313.413)
        The act revises the definition of “high-performing community school” for the law
regarding the right of first refusal to purchase school district property and the involuntary
disposition of school district property. Under the act, a community school is high performing if it
meets at least one of the following sets of conditions:
        1. The community school:
           a. Received a higher performance index score than the school district in which it is
        located on the two most recently issued state report cards; and
            b. Either:
              i. Received a performance rating of four stars or higher for the Progress component
            on its most recent report card; or
               ii. Is a dropout prevention and recovery community school and did not receive a
            rating for the Progress component on its most recent state report card.
        2. The community school serves only grades K through 3 and received a performance
rating of four stars or higher for the Early Literacy component on its most recent state report
card;
        3. The community school has not commenced operations or has been in operation for
less than one school year and:
            a. The school is replicating an operational and instructional model used by another
        high-performing community school; and



57 R.C. 3319.236, not in the act.

58 H.B. 110 of the 134th General Assembly and H.B. 33 of the 135th General Assembly.



P a g e | 234                                                                                    H.B. 96
                                                                                           Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                 LSC                           Legislative Budget Office



             b. The school either:
               i. Has an operator that received an overall rating of three stars or higher, or a “C”
        or higher, on its most recent performance report; or
              ii. Does not have an operator and its sponsor was rated “exemplary” or “effective”
       on the sponsor’s most recent evaluation.
        Formerly, a “high-performing community school” was a community school that met one
of the following:
        1. The school received:
           a. A performance rating of three stars or higher for the Achievement component on
        the state report card or increased its performance index score in each of the three
        previous years of operation; and
           b. A performance rating of four stars or higher for progress on its most recent state
        report card.
       2. Served only grades K through 3 and received either a performance rating of four stars
or higher for the Early Literacy component on its most recent state report card;
       3. Primarily served students enrolled in a dropout prevention and recovery program and
received a rating of “exceeds standards” on its most recent state report card; or
        4. Was a newly established community school implementing a community school model
with a track record of high-quality academic performance, as determined by the Department.
  Dropout prevention and recovery community schools
  (R.C. 3314.02, 3314.362, and 3314.383; conforming changes in R.C. 3301.0712, 3301.0727,
  3302.03, 3302.034, 3302.20, 3314.013, 3314.016, 3314.017, 3314.034, 3314.05, 3314.261,
  3314.29, 3314.35, 3314.351, 3314.46, 3314.361, 3314.38, 3314.381, 3314.382, 3317.163,
  3317.22, and 3319.301)
        Continuing law establishes various provisions that apply to community schools that
specialize in serving students enrolled in school-operated dropout prevention and recovery
programs (the “DOPR law”).
        The act limits the application of the DOPR law so that it applies to community schools that
enroll only students who are between ages 14 and 21, and who, at the time of their initial
enrollment, are at least one grade level behind their cohort age groups or experience crises that
significantly interfere with their academic progress such that they are prevented from continuing
their traditional educational programs. Under prior law, the DOPR law generally applied to
community schools in which a majority of students were enrolled in a school-operated dropout
prevention and recovery program.
       The act permits a community school that the DOPR law applied to under prior law, but
which does not meet the new requirements, to continue to operate for the 2025-2026 and 2026-
2027 school years. However, on and after July 1, 2027, each such school must meet the new
requirements.

P a g e | 235                                                                                 H.B. 96
                                                                                        Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                  LSC                            Legislative Budget Office



       Prior to that date, each school that does not meet the new requirements, upon approval
of the school’s sponsor, must (1) transfer those grades that do not comply to a separate
community school or (2) cease offering those grades. The Department must assign a unique
internal retrieval number to any separate community school created. Schools must assist
students who are not eligible to attend a under the new requirements with transferring to the
separate community school or enrolling in a different school.
  Sponsor evaluations
  (R.C. 3314.016 and Section 733.70; conforming changes in R.C. 3314.021 and 3314.034)
      Academic performance component calculation
        The act excludes all community schools whose contracts were not renewed or terminated
by their sponsor before the sponsor’s evaluation from the calculation of the academic
performance component of the evaluation. Continuing law already excludes from that calculation
schools that have been in operation for less than two full school years and certain schools that
enroll a majority of children with disabilities receiving special education and related services.
      Peer review
       The act eliminates the Department’s authority to permit a peer review of a sponsor
evaluation’s adherence to quality practices component.
      Sponsor evaluation cycles
       The act prohibits the Department from evaluating entities with an overall rating of
“exemplary” for five full school years and entities with a rating of “effective” for three full school
years after the rating was received. Prior law required them both to be evaluated once every
three years.
        The act qualifies a community school sponsor with an overall rating of “exemplary” for
specified incentives under continuing law, rather than requiring the sponsor to receive an overall
rating of “exemplary” for the two most recent years for which the sponsor was evaluated to
qualify as under former law.
        The act also requires the Department to annually publish academic performance data for
each sponsor, regardless of whether the sponsor is being evaluated for that school year. Finally,
it requires the Department to evaluate all community school sponsors for the 2025-2026 school
year and to use these ratings to determine the sponsor’s evaluation cycle.
      Office of Ohio School Sponsorship evaluation
        The act prohibits the Department from including Alternative Education Academy
(OHDELA) in the academic component calculation of the sponsor evaluation for the Office of Ohio
School Sponsorship for the 2025-2026 and 2026-2027 school years. However, that school must
be included in that component if the Office continues to sponsor it after the 2026-2027 school
year.




P a g e | 236                                                                                   H.B. 96
                                                                                          Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                LSC                            Legislative Budget Office



  Community school opening assurances
  (R.C. 3314.19)
         The act reduces from ten to five the number of days prior to opening for its first year of
operation or first year of operation from a new building that a community school sponsor must
provide prescribed assurances to the Department. Under continuing law, a sponsor must submit
the list of assurances for each school once when the school first opens for operation and, in the
case of a brick-and-mortar school, once again if it begins operating from a new building.
        The act also requires the sponsor of a community school that adds a facility to an existing
location, or an internet- or computer-based community school that changes its location or adds
a satellite location, to provide the prescribed assurances at least one day prior to the operation
in the new facility.
  Multiple facilities
  (R.C. 3314.05; conforming changes in R.C. 3314.411 and 3314.191)
       The act permits any community school to maintain multiple facilities in more than one
school district under the same contract. Prior to this change, a community school generally could
be established in only one school district under the same sponsorship contract.
         As under continuing law, the governing authority of a community school that maintains
facilities in more than one school district must designate one of those districts to be considered
the school’s primary location and to notify the Department of that designation. If the governing
authority elects to modify a community school’s primary location, it must notify the Department
of that modification.
  Contracts and comprehensive plans
  (R.C. 3314.03; conforming changes in R.C. 3314.015, 3314.021, 3314.034, and 3314.07)
       The act eliminates the requirement that each community school submit a comprehensive
plan to its sponsor. Instead, it requires that plan’s provisions to be included in the contract
between the school’s sponsor and governing authority. Under continuing law, those provisions
include the following:
        1. The process for future governing authority member selection;
        2. The management and administration of the school;
       3. If the community school is a currently existing public school or educational service
center building, alternative arrangements for students who choose not to attend the converted
school and for teachers who choose not to teach in the school or building after conversion;
        4. The instructional program and educational philosophy of the school; and
        5. Internal financial controls.




P a g e | 237                                                                                 H.B. 96
                                                                                        Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                 LSC                           Legislative Budget Office



  Classical schools and assessment administration
  (R.C. 3301.0711)
       The act permits a classical school to generally administer paper assessments in a paper
format. However, any student whose individualized education program (IEP) or plan developed
under Section 504 of the federal Rehabilitation Act of 1973 specifies that taking the assessment
in an online format is an appropriate accommodation for the student may take the assessment
in an online format. Under the act, a “classical school” is a community school that is a member
of the Ohio Classical School Association or its successor organization and uses a curriculum
substantially similar to that of a nationally recognized classical school network.
  Community school FTE reporting
  (Section 5 of H.B. 554 of the 134th G.A., amended in Sections 630.30 and 630.31)
        The act extends through the 2025-2026 school year the option for a qualifying community
school to elect to report its number of students to the Department on a full-time equivalent basis
using the lesser of:
       1. The maximum full-time equivalency for the portion of the school year for which a
student is enrolled in the school; or
        2. The sum of 1⁄6 of the full-time equivalency based on attendance for the portion of the
school year for which a student is enrolled and 1⁄6 of the full-time equivalency for each credit of
instruction earned during the enrollment period, up to five credits.
        For more information on the provision and the community schools that qualify under it,
see the LSC Final Analysis (PDF) for H.B. 554 of the 134th General Assembly, which is also available
at legislature.ohio.gov. H.B. 33 of the 135th General Assembly extended this provision through
the 2024-2025 school year.
VII. School policies
  Absence intervention, truancy, and chronic absenteeism
       The act substantially modifies the process in which school districts, brick-and-mortar
community schools, and STEM schools must engage when addressing student absences by
replacing several more structured statutory requirements and timelines related to the absence
intervention process with a similar set of district-led requirements. It also makes other changes.
      District and school responsibilities for student absences
      (R.C. 3321.191, repealed and reenacted, and 3321.19; conforming changes in R.C. 2151.27,
      3320.04, and 3321.16)
       The act repeals the structured statutory requirements and timelines related to the
absence intervention process established under prior law. Instead, it replaces that process with
a requirement to adopt a policy in consultation with the juvenile court that:
      1. Acknowledges that student absences from school for any reason, whether excused or
unexcused, take away from instructional time and have an adverse effect on student learning;


P a g e | 238                                                                                 H.B. 96
                                                                                        Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                 LSC                           Legislative Budget Office



        2. Identifies strategies to prevent students from becoming chronically absent;
       3. Includes procedures for notifying a student’s parent, guardian, or custodian, when the
student has been absent from school for a number of hours determined by the board, which
cannot exceed 5% of the minimum number of hours required in the school year;
        4. Establishes a tiered system that provides more intensive interventions and supports for
students with greater numbers of absences and includes resources to help students and their
families address the root causes of the absences;
      5. Provides for one or more absence intervention teams to work with students at risk of
becoming chronically absent and their families to improve the students’ attendance at school;
       6. Prohibits suspending, expelling, or otherwise preventing a student from attending
school based on the student’s absences; and
        7. Permits consultation or partnering with public, nonprofit, or private entities to provide
assistance to students and families in reducing absences.
      Chronic absenteeism definition
      (R.C. 3321.191(A))
       The act defines “chronically absent” as missing at least 10% of the minimum number of
hours required in the school year, regardless of whether the absence is excused or unexcused.
      Grade level promotion
      (R.C. 3313.609)
       The act eliminates a policy requirement that, as a condition of generally subjecting a
student to retention rather than grade level promotion, a school district or community school
determine whether that student has been absent without excuse for more than 10% of the
required attendance days of the school year.
      Filing truancy complaint in juvenile court
      (R.C. 3321.16; conforming changes in R.C. 3321.22)
        As part of its repeal of the structured statutory requirements and timelines related to the
absence intervention process, the act eliminates the requirement that if the student’s absences
persist after the school has made meaningful attempts to reengage the student, the school must
file a complaint in juvenile court not later than 61 days after the absence intervention team’s
plan was implemented. Instead, the act requires a complaint only if the school district determines
that the student is not making satisfactory progress in improving the student’s attendance at
school. When a complaint is filed, it must allege that the child is an unruly child for being an
habitual truant and that the parent or guardian has violated the duty to cause the child to attend
school.




P a g e | 239                                                                                 H.B. 96
                                                                                        Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                 LSC                            Legislative Budget Office



       Under continuing law, an “habitual truant” is a student of compulsory school age who is
absent without legitimate excuse for 30 or more consecutive hours, 42 or more hours in one
school month, or 72 or more hours in a school year.59
      Student absences for driver education
      (R.C. 3321.043)
       Under the act, a school district must excuse up to eight hours of absences for the sole
purpose of a high school student attending a private driver training course approved by the
Director of Public Safety. The allotment must not exceed two hours per day for not more than
four consecutive or nonconsecutive days. The district must require the student to complete any
classroom assignments missed during that time.
       The act prohibits a student from being released from a core curriculum subject course to
attend the driver education course.
  Student cellphone use
  (R.C. 3313.753 and 5502.262)
        The act requires each public school’s (any school district, community school, STEM school,
or college-preparatory boarding school) policy governing the use of cellphones by students
during school hours to outright prohibit student cellphone use during the instructional day. This
prohibition replaces the requirement imposed by H.B. 250 of the 135th General Assembly,
effective August 14, 2024, to adopt a cellphone policy that (1) emphasizes limited use during
school hours and (2) reduces use-related distractions in classroom settings.
         The act maintains an exception that permits cellphone use for student learning or to
monitor or address a health concern if determined appropriate by the school’s governing body
or if that use is included in a student’s individualized education program (IEP) or section 504 plan.
The act also permits a student to use a cellphone or other electronic communications device to
monitor or address a health concern if the school receives a written statement from the student’s
physician requiring such use.
       Each school that does not already have a compliant policy must adopt one by January 1,
2026. The act also eliminates the requirement that the Department develop a model policy that
accounts for available research on the effects of student cellphone use in school settings.
  Emergency management plan protocol
       Under the act, each public school administrator must include a protocol that addresses
student cellphone use during an active threat or emergency in the comprehensive emergency
management plan for each building under the administrator’s control. The act suspends the
cellphone prohibition for a school building during an active threat or emergency if the building’s
comprehensive emergency management plan permits it.




59 R.C. 2151.011(B)(18), not in the act.



P a g e | 240                                                                                  H.B. 96
                                                                                         Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                 LSC                           Legislative Budget Office



  Artificial intelligence policies
  (R.C. 3301.24; conforming changes in R.C. 3314.03, and 3326.11)
         The act requires the Department to develop a model policy on the use of artificial
intelligence in schools by December 31, 2025. The policy must address appropriate use of
artificial intelligence by students and staff for educational purposes.
         By July 1, 2026, each school district, community school, and STEM school must adopt an
artificial intelligence policy. Districts and schools may choose to adopt the model policy created
by the Department.
  Religious instruction released time policy
  (R.C. 3313.6022)
        The act requires each school district, under its released time courses in religious
instruction policy established under continuing law, to add minimum and maximum time
parameters that:
        1. Permit students to attend such a course for at least one period a week; and
       2. Limit that attendance to no more than two periods per week for elementary or middle
school students and no more than two units of high school credit per week for high school
students.
       Under the act, a school’s policy also cannot prohibit students from bringing external
educational and program materials into school.
  Interdistrict open enrollment policies
  (R.C. 3313.98)
      Enrollment of military students
        The act prohibits a school district from requiring a student whose parent is an active duty
member of the U.S. armed forces stationed in Ohio to comply with any application deadline
established in the district’s interdistrict open enrollment policy.
      Objection to students enrolling in other districts
        The act eliminates a school district’s authority to adopt a resolution to object to its
resident students open enrolling into another district if it is receiving federal Impact Aid under a
repealed federal law and at least 10% of its students meet the requirements to be included in
the calculation of that aid.
VIII. Transportation
  Community school transportation consortium
  (R.C. 3314.093)
       The act permits the governing authorities of two or more community schools to enter into
an agreement to establish a consortium to provide or arrange transportation to and from school
for students enrolled in participating schools. A consortium must act on behalf of each

P a g e | 241                                                                                 H.B. 96
                                                                                        Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                        LSC                                Legislative Budget Office



participating school regarding student transportation and comply with continuing law on student
transportation in the same manner as a community school.
        A consortium may do both of the following in the same manner as a community school:
        1. Enter into an agreement with a school district that has resident students enrolled in a
participating school, under which the consortium accepts responsibility to provide or arrange for
the transportation of those students;
        2. Unilaterally accept responsibility for the transportation of students enrolled in
participating schools.
        A consortium must designate one of the participating schools as a fiscal agent. The fiscal
agent must use the Department’s data collection system to report all combined data necessary
for the Department to calculate transportation payments for the consortium. The Department
must calculate and make transportation payments to a consortium in the same manner as for a
community school.
  Student transportation via mass transit system
  (R.C. 3327.017)
       The act requires a city, local, or exempted village school district located in a county with
a population between 530,000 and 540,000 according to the most recent federal decennial
census (currently only Montgomery County) and that uses mass transit systems to transport
students to and from a community school or chartered nonpublic school to ensure that any
transfer between routes does not occur at the central hub for the mass transit system. The act
does not specify a particular school year or special effective date for the requirement. However,
the new requirement would not impact any current contracts between a school district and a
mass transit system for student transportation until those contracts are renewed or a new
contract is entered after September 30, 2025.
  Multifunction school activity buses
  (R.C. 3327.08, 3327.10, 4511.01, 4511.75, 4511.76, 4511.77, 4511.771, and 4511.78)
         The act authorizes school districts, chartered nonpublic schools, and community schools
to purchase and use a multifunction school activity bus to transport students between school
and other school-related functions or activities (e.g., field trips, sports competitions, club events,
etc.). A multifunction school activity bus is a type of school bus; however, it does not include the
traffic control devices like a stop-arm or the typical school bus flashing lights.




                Multifunction school activity buses. Photo credit: Thomas Built Buses, thomasbuiltbuses.com.




P a g e | 242                                                                                              H.B. 96
                                                                                                     Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                  LSC                         Legislative Budget Office



       In compliance with federal law and because a multifunction school activity bus does not
have the requisite safety equipment to control traffic, the act prohibits it from being used to
transport students between school and home or between school and designated bus stops.60
        Other than not being used for regular bus routes, the requirements and authorizations
for multifunction school activity buses are similar to regular school buses. For example, a driver
of a multifunction school activity bus must meet all the standards of a regular school bus driver
(e.g., hold a valid commercial driver’s license, pass the requisite background checks, and
complete specified student transportation training). Additionally, a school board or a governing
authority of a chartered nonpublic school or community school may purchase a multifunction
school activity bus in the same manner as a regular school bus.
  Student transportation workgroup
  (Section 733.80)
        The act requires the Director of Education and Workforce to establish a workgroup on
student transportation. The workgroup must consist of members selected by the Director,
including representatives from:
        1. The chairs and ranking members of the House and Senate Education Committees;
       2. School districts, including districts from rural, small town, suburban, and urban
typologies;
        3. Career-technical education centers;
        4. Educational service centers;
        5. Community schools;
        6. Chartered nonpublic schools; and
        7. The Ohio Association for Pupil Transportation.
       The workgroup must monitor and review the student transportation system during the
2025-2026 school year and develop recommendations for changes to better meet the
transportation needs of Ohio students. It also must conduct a study of and develop
recommendations on the feasibility of each school district providing transportation to students
enrolled in a community school or nonpublic school on days that the community school or
nonpublic school is open for operation with students in attendance, but the district is not. The
workgroup must submit a report on its findings and recommendations to the Governor and the
General Assembly by June 30, 2026, and disband after submitting the report.
  Pupil Transportation Pilot Program
  (Section 265.550 of H.B. 33 of the 135th G.A., as amended in Sections 620.10 and 620.11)
      The act extends the operation of the Montgomery County Pupil Transportation Pilot
Program to the 2025-2026 and 2026-2027 school years. Under the pilot program, an educational


60 49 C.F.R. 571.3, 571.108, and 571.131.



P a g e | 243                                                                                H.B. 96
                                                                                       Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                 LSC                           Legislative Budget Office



service center provides transportation to qualifying students in lieu of the students receiving
transportation from their resident school district. For more information on the pilot program, see
the LSC Final Analysis for H.B. 33 (PDF), which is available on the General Assembly’s website:
legislature.ohio.gov.
      The act additionally requires the Department of Education and Workforce to evaluate the
Montgomery County Pupil Transportation Pilot Program and issue a report of its findings by
September 15, 2027.
  Rural Transportation Grant Program
  (Section 265.600)
       The act creates the Rural Transportation Grant Program for FYs 2026 and 2027. Under the
program, the Department of Education and Workforce must award rural transportation grants to
dropout prevention and recovery community schools that meet both of the following
requirements:
      1. More than 75% of the school’s students are economically disadvantaged, as
determined by the Department; and
        2. The school’s territory is in three counties and contains more than 12 school districts.
      The Department must determine the amount of each grant, but a grant cannot exceed
$450,000 for any fiscal year. Schools must use the grants for student transportation.
  Bus purchasing grants
  (R.C. 3317.071, repealed)
        The act eliminates the bus purchasing grant program, under which the Department last
distributed grants to city, local, and exempted village school districts in FY 2022 and FY 2023.
IX. Other
  State report card – Early Literacy component
  (R.C. 3302.03)
        Under continuing law, the percentage of students promoted to fourth grade under the
Third Grade Reading Guarantee is a performance measure for the Early Literacy component for
public schools’ state report card. The act revises the measure so that it is based only on students
who attain a promotion score on the third grade English Language Arts assessment or an
alternative assessment, rather than any student who attains a promotion score or otherwise
qualifies for an exemption from retention as under former law.
  Demand side educator employment data
  (R.C. 3301.82)
      Collection of data
         Beginning September 30, 2026, the act requires the Department annually to collect school
district, community school, and STEM school employment and vacancy data for:


P a g e | 244                                                                                 H.B. 96
                                                                                        Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                   LSC                            Legislative Budget Office



        1. Teachers;
        2. Related services providers and other providers of specialized services;
        3. Principals and assistant principals;
        4. Paraprofessionals;
        5. Bus drivers; and
        6. Any other positions as determined by the Department.
      Report aggregate data
        The act requires the Department to report the number of vacant positions aggregated by:
        1. Type of position;
        2. Subject area;
        3. Geographic area, including rural and urban areas;
        4. The number of educator positions filled by long-term substitute teachers, unlicensed
individuals, or educators with emergency credentials disaggregated by school, grade level, and
endorsement;
        5. The reasons why a position was vacant, which may include:
           a. Retirement;
           b. New position;
           c. Repeated poor teacher evaluations;
           d. Position is no longer necessary;
           e. Reduction in force.
        6. Methods used to fill vacant positions, which must include:
            a. Hiring of short- or long-term substitutes;
            b. Hiring retired educators;
            c. Hiring educators from alternative licensure program candidates;
            d. Contracting with an educational service center or other entity;
            e. Hiring personnel with emergency credentials or who are unlicensed; and
            f. Other methods determined by the Department.
        7. Positions that remain unfilled.
      Statewide data on educators
       The act also requires the Department annually to collect and report the following
statewide data on educators:




P a g e | 245                                                                                    H.B. 96
                                                                                           Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                LSC                           Legislative Budget Office



       1. Educator preparation program enrollment and completion data annually,
disaggregated by endorsement area and grade level;
       2. The number of new educator licenses issued by the State Board of Education annually,
disaggregated by licensure pathway and including those issued through reciprocity with another
state;
        3. Educator retention at one-year, three-year, five-year, and ten-year rates; and
        4. Educator demographic data aggregated at the district and state level.
      Publish collected data
        The Department annually must publish and summarize the collected data on its public
website. To the extent possible, the Department must report that data at the state, district, and
school level.
  Competency-based adult education programs
  (R.C. 3313.902, 3314.38, and 3345.86, all repealed and reenacted; R.C. 3317.036, 3317.23,
  3317.231, and 3317.24, all repealed; conforming changes in R.C. 3317.01; Section 733.20)
      Eliminate existing programs
        The act eliminates the Adult Diploma Program and 22+ Adult High School Diploma
Program, effective July 1, 2026. The act allows individuals enrolled in those programs to complete
their program in accordance with its requirements prior to its repeal, so long as they complete it
by June 30, 2027. Alternatively, beginning July 1, 2026, the act allows an individual to instead
complete a competency-based program as established in it. The Department is required to pay
an eligible institution or eligible provider as required by the program an individual completes.
      Competency-based educational programs
        Definition
        Under the act, a “competency-based educational program” is any system of academic
instruction, assessment, grading, and reporting in which individuals receive credit based on
demonstrations and assessments of their learning rather than the amount of time they spend
studying a subject. A competency-based educational program must encourage accelerated
learning among individuals who master academic materials quickly while providing additional
instructional support time for individuals who need it.
        Providers
       The act permits a city, local, or exempted village school district or community school that
operates a dropout prevention and recovery program, the Buckeye United School District
operated by the Department of Youth Services, the Ohio Central School System operated by the
Department of Rehabilitation and Correction, a joint vocational school district that operates an
adult education program, a community college, a state community college, a technical college, a
university branch campus, or an Ohio technical center (“provider”) to establish a competency-
based educational program for eligible individuals to earn a high school diploma.



P a g e | 246                                                                                H.B. 96
                                                                                       Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                LSC                            Legislative Budget Office



       An individual is eligible to enroll in a competency-based education program if they are at
least 18 years old, have officially withdrawn from school, and have not been awarded a high
school diploma or certificate of high school equivalence. Eligible individuals are prohibited from
being assigned to classes or setting with individuals who are under age 18.
       A provider may enroll an individual for up to three consecutive school years. In the event
of a hardship experienced by the individual, a provider may request that the Department allow
additional time to meet the diploma requirements.
        A provider must comply with standards adopted by the Department and establish a career
plan for each individual enrolled in the program that specifies their career goals and describes
how the individual will demonstrate competency or earn course credits to earn a diploma and
attain career goals.
        The provider must report each individual enrolled in this program to the Department.
Further, the provider must contact each diploma recipient to collect data on the individual’s
career outcomes at 6, 12, and 18 months after the diploma is awarded. This must include whether
the individual is gainfully employed, participating in an apprenticeship, enrolled in postsecondary
education, or servicing in the military, and the data collected must be reported to the
Department.
        High school diploma requirements
      An individual enrolled in a program may earn a diploma by either completing three
demonstrations of competency or completing two demonstrations of competency and
completing course credits in specified subject areas.
        Demonstrations of competency include:
        1. Attaining a competency score, as determined by the Department, on the Algebra I or
English language arts II end-of-course exams;
       2. Attaining a workforce readiness score, as determined by the Department, on the
nationally recognized job skills assessment (WorkKeys);
       3. Obtaining an industry-recognized credential, or group of credentials, that qualify the
student for a high school diploma or an industry-recognized credential that is aligned to a
technical education program provided by Ohio technical center;
       4. Earning a cumulative score of proficient or higher on three or more state technical
assessments (WebXams);
      5. Completing a pre-apprenticeship program aligned with the student’s career field and
then providing evidence of acceptance into a registered apprenticeship in that field, or
completing an apprenticeship registered with the Ohio State Apprenticeship Council;
       6. Completing 250 hours of work-based learning experience with evidence of positive
evaluations; or
        7. Obtaining an OhioMeansJobs-readiness seal.
        The course credits include:

P a g e | 247                                                                                 H.B. 96
                                                                                        Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                   LSC                        Legislative Budget Office



        1. Four credits in English language arts;
        2. Four credits of math, one credit of which may be a career-based math course aligned
to the individual’s career plan;
        3. Three credits in science;
        4. Three credits in social studies; and
        5. One-half credit in financial literacy, which may be applied to the number of math or
social studies credits.
        An individual who qualifies for a diploma using three demonstrations of competency must
either attain a competency score on Algebra I and English language arts II end-of course exams
or attain a workforce readiness score on the WorkKeys. A student who qualifies for a diploma
using two demonstrations of competency and course credits may use any two demonstrations
of competency.
        Department responsibilities
       The Department must adopt rules as necessary to administer the program, such as
program standards, requirements for determining amounts paid to providers, and guidelines for
approving hardship requests for program participants. Annually, the Department must certify the
enrollment and attendance of each individual and pay the provider up to $7,500 per school year
based on the extent of the individual’s completion of diploma requirements. The Department
must award a high school diploma to individuals who successfully qualify for one under the
program.
  Aim Higher Pilot Program
  (Section 265.560)
       The act requires the Department to establish the Aim Higher Pilot Program to provide
additional funding to each joint vocational school district (JVSD) that operates a dropout
prevention and recovery program (DOPR) in FY 2026. To participate, an eligible JVSD must notify
the Department of its intent to participate.
        The Department must pay each participating JVSD the following for each newly enrolled
student in the JVSD’s DOPR in FY 2026 or FY 2027: $500 for each credit earned and $2,500 for
each completed industry-recognized credential, or group of credentials, that meet the criteria to
help the student qualify for a high school diploma. For each JVSD with a DOPR program in its first
three years of operation and that requests it, the Department must also pay a one-time grant of
$250,000. A JVSD that receives the one-time grant must designate $175,000 for career-technical
education equipment and $75,000 of the grant for building renovation. A JVSD must spend any
of the payments it receives under the pilot program by July 1, 2027.
  Ohio Code-Scholar Program
  (R.C. 3313.905)
      The act replaces the five-year Ohio Code-Scholar Pilot Program established in 2021 with
a permanent program and prescribes that the program be a hands-on educational initiative

P a g e | 248                                                                                H.B. 96
                                                                                       Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                 LSC                           Legislative Budget Office



designed for students in grades 4 through 12 with an emphasis on experiential learning in
computer science, coding, and digital literacy. Under the act, Southern State Community College
facilitates the program, and the act outlines permissible uses of the program’s appropriation.
      Use of program funds
        The act permits funds to be used for curriculum development and alignment, teacher
training and resource creation, coordination with K-12 schools statewide, and partnership
development with other educational institutions, workforce agencies, and regional employers.
Program funds may also be used to implement and scale the program statewide, prioritizing
outreach to underserved and rural areas, particularly within Ohio’s Appalachian region. Finally,
the funds may be used to provide ongoing institutional support for Southern State Community
College, including operational needs that enhance its educational mission, technology and
infrastructure upgrades, community outreach, and services that strengthen the college’s regional
impact in the Appalachian corridor.
      Annual report
       Southern State must submit an annual report to the Director of Education and Workforce
and the General Assembly by June 30 that includes (1) the number of students and districts
served by the program, (2) progress toward statewide implementation, (3) regional economic
and educational impact, and (4) use of funds for both programmatic and general operational
support.
      Departmental oversight
       The act requires the Director of Development to oversee the allocation and use of funds
and permits the Director of Education and Workforce to establish guidelines to ensure
compliance with the act.
  Payment of tuition for students in residential treatment facilities
  (R.C. 3313.64)
        The act addresses payment of tuition for educational services when a child is placed in a
home located in a district different from the district where the child’s parent resides (or a
similarly licensed facility in another state). For purposes of determining district residency, a
“home” is a foster home, a group home, or a residential facility. In this case, the school district
where a child’s parent resides must pay tuition to the home or facility if (1) the child was
parentally placed in the home or facility in consultation with, and upon the recommendation of,
the Ohio Resilience through Integrated Systems and Excellence Program (OhioRISE) and (2) the
home or facility provides education services that meet the minimum education standards
established by the Director of Education and Workforce (or substantially similar requirements of
the jurisdiction in which an out-of-state facility is located), except that reduction in the minimum
number of instructional hours is permitted only as necessary to accommodate the child’s
treatment program.




P a g e | 249                                                                                 H.B. 96
                                                                                        Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                        LSC                    Legislative Budget Office



      Notice of admission and collaborative reentry plan
       When a child is admitted to a home or out-of-state facility, it must notify the district
where the child’s parent resides and the district where the home or facility is located that the
home or facility will be provided educational services to the child until the child is discharged.
When the child is discharged, the home or facility must notify the district where the child’s parent
resides and collaborate on a supportive reentry plan.
      Payment structure
         The act requires the district where the parent resides to continue to enroll the student
and excuse the child from attendance until the child is discharged. The total educational cost the
district must pay will be determined by a formula approved by the Department. The Department
must design the formula to calculate a per diem cost for the educational services provided each
day. The formula also must reflect the total actual cost incurred in providing those services. The
Department must certify that cost to both the home or facility and the district responsible for
tuition. The act requires the Department to deduct the certified amount from the state basic aid
funds payable to the responsible district and pay that amount to the home or facility. The district
must continue to report the child in its enrollment for funding purposes.
      Change in parent’s residence
         The act provides that if the parent’s residence changes during the child’s stay the
Department may re-determine the responsible school district based on evidence provided by the
district currently responsible for tuition.
      Discharge procedures
         When a child is discharged, the home or facility must immediately notify the responsible
district and the Department and provide both parties with a certified transcript of all coursework
completed during the child’s admission. The responsible district must accept all completed
coursework and award credit in accordance with the district’s policy.
      Diploma requirements
        When a high school student is discharged and returns to the parent’s residence, the child
must meet requirements for receiving a high school diploma that are no more stringent than
those that apply to students who enroll in a public or chartered nonpublic high school after
receiving a home education.61
      State scholarship recipients
       Finally, the act exempts a school district from the responsibility to pay tuition for a child
admitted to a home or facility who has been awarded a state scholarship.




61 See R.C. 3313.618; R.C. 3321.042, not in the act.



P a g e | 250                                                                                 H.B. 96
                                                                                        Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                  LSC                             Legislative Budget Office



  School district operational revenue and expenditure report
  (R.C. 5705.391; conforming changes in R.C. 3313.489, 3316.031, 3316.043, 3316.08, 3316.16,
  and 5705.412; Section 265.660)
        The act eliminates the requirement that each school district annually submit five-year
projections of operational revenue and expenses and, instead, requires them to submit
appropriations, revenue, and fund balance assumptions contained in the district’s budget for that
year, in addition to projections of expenditures, revenues, and fund balances for the three
succeeding fiscal years. Each district must submit this information by August 31 of each fiscal year
and updated information and projections by the last day of February. For FY 2026, districts must
make the initial submission by October 15, 2025.
        The Department and the Auditor of State must jointly adopt rules governing the
submission of current budget information and three-year projection submissions. The rules must
specify the information required for the submissions and any additional financial and operating
information necessary for the audits and analyses conducted by the Auditor of State or the
Department, including special and federal funds expenditures, revenues, and balances.
        The Department and the Auditor of State, beginning with submissions for FY 2026, must
label the projections regarding property tax allocation in the projection as “state reimbursement
for property tax credits,” rather than “state share of local property taxes” as under former law.
       The act also adds current budget information to provisions of law where a district’s three-
year forecasts are used or required, including for determinations of the district’s financial
solvency. The act also requires the Auditor of State or the Department to examine the current
budget information and three-year projections to determine whether a district has the potential
to incur a deficit during the first two years of the three-year period, rather than the first three
years of the five-year period, as under former law.
  Contracts for school district construction projects
  (R.C. 3313.46)
        The act expands the types of school district construction projects that are subject to the
contract bidding process prescribed under continuing law. The act applies the contract bidding
process to any “building or other property,” rather than any “school building” as under prior law,
that will exceed the statutory competitive bidding threshold.
  Participation in interscholastic athletics at a different school
  (R.C. 3313.5313)
        The act modifies the eligibility criteria for students who are victims of certain qualifying
offenses to participate in interscholastic athletics at a different school. Specifically, it eliminates
the eligibility of public and nonpublic school students but maintains the eligibility of home-
educated students.
       Under continuing law, a qualifying offense includes any of the following committed by a
school official, employee, volunteer, or another student:


P a g e | 251                                                                                    H.B. 96
                                                                                           Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                 LSC                            Legislative Budget Office



        1. Harassment, intimidation, or bullying;62
        2. An offense of violence;63
        3. A violation of state importuning law;64
        4. An attempt to commit an offense of violence or to violate state importuning law;
       5. Conduct by a school official, employee, or volunteer that violates that Licensure Code
of Professional Conduct for Ohio Educators developed by the State Board of Education. See the
Licensure Code of Professional Conduct for Ohio Educators (PDF), which is available on the State
Board of Education website: sboe.ohio.gov.
  Participating in ice hockey at other schools
  (R.C. 3313.536)
        The act permits the superintendent of a school district to allow a student enrolled in
another district the opportunity to participate in ice hockey as an interscholastic athletic activity
at a school within the superintendent’s district if:
       1. The district in which the student is enrolled does not offer ice hockey as an
interscholastic athletic activity;
       2. The district in which the student is enrolled is located less than 20 miles away from the
superintendent’s district; and
        3. The superintendents of both districts enter into an agreement approving the student’s
participation in ice hockey at the district in which the student is not enrolled.
        The act expressly states that the student does not have to be enrolled in or a resident of
the district offering ice hockey to participate. However, the student must be of the appropriate
age and grade level for the school at which the student participates in ice hockey, as determined
by the superintendent of that district, and to fulfill and be subject to the same academic,
nonacademic, and financial requirements as any other participant, including trying out for a
position on the team.
  Online learning schools
  (R.C. 3302.42)
       The act explicitly permits a school district that operates an online learning school to
employ teachers and nonteaching employees for that school or to contract with a nonprofit or
for-profit entity to operate it, including by providing personnel, related services, curriculum,
supplies, equipment, or facilities.




62 R.C. 3313.666, not in the act.

63 R.C. 2901.01, not in the act.

64 R.C. 2907.07, not in the act.



P a g e | 252                                                                                  H.B. 96
                                                                                         Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                     LSC                           Legislative Budget Office



  Public entities and preschool children with disabilities
  (Section 265.190)
        The act mandates that the Department require certain public entities that serve preschool
children with disabilities to adhere to the Step Up to Quality Program, Ohio’s quality rating and
improvement system for early learning and development programs. Those entities include
educational service centers (ESCs), county boards of developmental disabilities, specified other
state institutions, and qualifying school districts. A school district that serves preschool special
education students is exempt from the requirement unless it receives funds under the Early
Childhood Education Grant Program or provides publicly funded childcare.
        The last several main operating appropriations acts have had similar mandates but, under
those mandates, the Department had to require all school districts, ESCs, county boards of
developmental disabilities, and specified state institutions serving preschool children with
disabilities to:
        1. Adhere to Ohio’s early learning program standards;
        2. Participate in the Step Up to Quality Program; and
      3. Document child progress using research-based indicators prescribed by the
Department and annually report the results.65
        Under continuing law, the Department must make annual payments for preschool
children with disabilities who are enrolled in city, local, and exempted village school districts and
special education programs at institutions under the jurisdiction of the departments of
Behavioral Health, Development Disabilities, Youth Services, and Rehabilitation and Correction.
The Department also must make a payment to an ESC or county board of development disabilities
that provides services to preschool children with disabilities under an agreement with a city,
local, or exempted village school district using funds deducted from the school district.66
  Aspire Program transfer
  (Section 525.60)
       The act requires the transfer of the Aspire Program’s administration from the Department
of Higher Education (ODHE) to the Department of Education and Workforce (DEW) by July 1,
2026.
        The Aspire Program provides grants to eligible education providers to develop and
administer courses for adults that focus on instruction in basic literacy, workplace literacy, family
literacy, English for speakers of other languages (ESOL), and preparation for high school
equivalency tests. The program is funded through the U.S. Department of Education under the


65 See Section 265.240 of H.B. 33 of the 135th General Assembly, Section 265.190 of H.B. 110 of the 110th

General Assembly, Section 265.190 of H.B. 166 of the 133rd General Assembly, and Section 265.190 of
H.B. 49 of the 132nd General Assembly.
66 R.C. 3317.0213. See also R.C. 3323.091, not in the act.



P a g e | 253                                                                                     H.B. 96
                                                                                            Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                    LSC                          Legislative Budget Office



Adult Education and Family Literacy Act (Title II of the Workforce Innovation Opportunity Act)
and state matching funds.
       By July 1, 2026, the DEW Director and the Chancellor of Higher Education must identify
the duties, functions, and staff resources within ODHE that pertain to the program. The Director
and Chancellor may enter into a memorandum of understanding to implement the transfer of
those duties, functions, and resources and the transfer of any responsibilities required to obtain
federal grant funds to support the program.
      Transfer of employees
        All employees whose primary responsibilities include administering the Aspire Program
and staff resources used to administer it transfer to DEW, as determined by the DEW Director.
Subject to the layoff provisions of the State Personnel Law, transferred employees who are not
subject to the Public Employees Collective Bargaining Law (PECBL) are assigned job classifications
as discussed below. Transferred employees retain their accrued benefits. The DEW Director may
do any of the following with respect to transferred employees:
    ▪ Establish, change, and abolish positions whose primary responsibilities include
        administering the Aspire Program;
    ▪ Assign, reassign, classify, reclassify, transfer, reduce, promote, or demote all DEW
        employees who are not subject to the PECBL;
    ▪ With respect to an employee who is subject to the state job classification plan but exempt
        from collective bargaining, assign or reassign that employee to a bargaining unit for
        collective bargaining purposes if the DEW Director determines that is the appropriate
        bargaining unit.
       If an employee in the E-1 pay range is assigned, reassigned, classified, reclassified,
transferred, reduced, or demoted to a position in a lower classification, both of the following
apply:
    ▪ The DEW Director, or if the employee is transferred outside of DEW, the DAS Director,
        must assign the employee to the appropriate classification and place the employee in pay
        step X.
    ▪ The employee cannot receive any increase in compensation until the maximum rate of
        pay for that classification exceeds the employee’s compensation.
      Actions taken in connection with transferring employees are not appealable to the State
Personnel Board of Review.67
      OBM Director
      Pursuant to continuing law governing budget adjustments, the OBM Director must make
budget and accounting changes to implement the Aspire Program’s transfer. The OBM Director
may rename funds, create new funds, transfer funds, consolidate funds, or make other


67 By reference to R.C. 124.152, and R.C. 124.321 to 124.328, not in the act.



P a g e | 254                                                                                   H.B. 96
                                                                                          Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                   LSC                   Legislative Budget Office



administrative changes. The OBM Director may, if necessary, cancel or establish encumbrances
or parts of encumbrances in FY 2027 in the appropriate funds and appropriation items for the
same purposes and for payment to the same vendors. The act appropriates any encumbrances
the OBM Director establishes. If necessary for the continued efficient administration of the
program, the OBM Director may transfer appropriations between ODHE and DEW to continue
levels of program services and efficiently deliver funding to the program as appropriated.68




68 By reference to R.C. 126.15, not in the act.



P a g e | 255                                                                           H.B. 96
                                                                                  Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                  LSC                            Legislative Budget Office




                ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
Environmental fees
    ▪ Extends and revises various fees charged by the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency
        (OEPA) under the laws governing water pollution control, safe drinking water, and scrap
        tires.
    ▪ Extends solid waste transfer and disposal fees an additional two years, until June 30, 2026.
    ▪ Increases, by 50%, fees related to OEPA’s air pollution control program, including fees for
        facility permits to install and annual fees that are based on total air pollution emissions
        or emission capacity.
    ▪ Creates an annual $5,000 flat fee charged to synthetic minor facilities and Title V air
        pollution control permit holders in addition to the existing emission-based annual fees.
    ▪ Eliminates the $140 infectious waste generator registration application and renewal fee.
    ▪ Eliminates the application fee of 0.5% of the total exempt facility project costs, not to
        exceed $2,000, for an industrial water pollution control facility that files for a certificate
        to exempt the facility from certain taxes.
    ▪ Eliminates a $500 application fee for an industrial water pollution control certificate that
        applied to industrial water pollution control facilities under law in effect until
        June 26, 2003.
Waste facility permit notification
    ▪ Allows the OEPA Director to give notification of the public hearing regarding a solid waste
        facility permit application or infectious waste treatment facility permit application either
        via newspaper publication or publication on the OEPA website, instead of only in a
        newspaper as in prior law.
E-Check
  E-Check extension
    ▪ Extends the motor vehicle inspection and maintenance program (E-Check) in the counties
        where the program is implemented by authorizing the OEPA Director to request the DAS
        Director to extend the existing contract with the contractor that conducts the program
        beginning July 1, 2025, for a period of up to 24 months until June 30, 2027.
    ▪ Requires a decentralized E-Check contract to achieve “an equivalent amount of emissions
        reductions” as the centralized program authorized by the contract specified above, rather
        than “at least the same emissions reductions” as the centralized contract as in prior law.
    ▪ Requires the OEPA Director, if USEPA determines that the E-check program is not
        necessary for Ohio or any area of Ohio to comply with the federal Clean Air Act, to
        immediately discontinue the program and take any actions necessary to effectuate its
        termination.

P a g e | 256                                                                                   H.B. 96
                                                                                          Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                 LSC                           Legislative Budget Office



  E-check review and report
    ▪ Requires the OEPA Director to conduct a review to assess whether the current E-check
        program is necessary and to evaluate the impact of weather patterns over northeast Ohio
        on emissions and air quality.
    ▪ Requires the OEPA Director, by March 30, 2027, to submit to the General Assembly a
        report compiling the findings of the review, and make it available to the public on OEPA’s
        website.
Air nuisance rule
    ▪ Requires the OEPA Director to remove any air nuisance rule from the federally required
        national ambient air quality standards state implementation plan and to take steps as are
        necessary to do so.
    ▪ Prohibits the Director, on and after September 30, 2025, from including an air nuisance
        rule in the state implementation plan or relying on an air nuisance rule to implement or
        enforce ambient air quality standards adopted pursuant to the federal Clean Air Act.
  Community air monitoring
    ▪ Establishes requirements governing community air monitoring
    ▪ Generally prohibits the OEPA Director from either:
            Imposing conditions in a permit that require community air monitoring, unless
             otherwise agreed to by the owner or air operator and the Director; or
            Requiring an applicant for a permit for an air contaminant source to conduct
             community air monitoring prior to the issuance or renewal of a permit or a variance.
    ▪ Prohibits data produced from community air monitoring from being used as evidence to
        support either:
            A fine, penalty, or notice of violation against any person for violations of or
             noncompliance with any federal or state air pollution regulation; or
            An administrative, regulatory, or judicial enforcement action, lawsuit, or proceeding
             for violations of or noncompliance with any federal or state air pollution regulation.
    ▪ Generally prohibits data produced from community air monitoring from being considered
        or relied upon by OEPA or a local air pollution control authority in any rulemaking action,
        or in any action relating to the issuance of an installation permit or operating permit.


Environmental fees
(R.C. 3745.11, 3734.57, and 3734.901)
        The act extends the period of validity for various OEPA-administered fees that remain
largely unchanged under the laws governing air pollution control, water pollution control, safe


P a g e | 257                                                                                 H.B. 96
                                                                                        Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                        LSC                             Legislative Budget Office



drinking water, and scrap tires. The following table sets forth each fee, its purposes, and the time
period during which OEPA is authorized to charge the fee under prior law and the act:

                                                                  Fee period under        Fee change under
    Type of fee                       Description
                                                                      prior law                the act

 Synthetic minor       Each person who owns or operates a       The fee was required      The act extends
 facility: emission    synthetic minor facility must pay an     to be paid through        the fee through
 fee                   annual fee in accordance with a fee      June 30, 2026.            June 30, 2028. It
                       schedule that is based on the sum of                               also increases
                       the actual annual emissions from the                               each fee in the
                       facility of particulate matter, sulfur                             fee schedule by
                       dioxide, nitrogen dioxide, organic                                 50% and adds an
                       compounds, and lead. A synthetic                                   additional $5,000
                       minor facility is a facility for which                             annual fee.
                       one or more permits to install or
                       permits to operate have been issued
                       for the air contaminant source at the
                       facility that include terms and
                       conditions that lower the facility’s
                       potential to emit air contaminants
                       below the major source (Title V)
                       thresholds established in rules.

 Wastewater            A person applying for a plan approval    An applicant was          The act extends
 treatment works:      for a wastewater treatment works is      required to pay the       the tier one fee
 plan approval         required to pay one of the following     tier one fee through      through June 30,
 application fee       fees depending on the date:              June 30, 2026, and        2028; the tier two
                                                                the tier two fee on       fee begins on or
                           ▪      A tier one fee of $100 plus
                                                                and after July 1,         after July 1, 2028.
                                  0.65% of the estimated
                                                                2026.
                                  project cost, up to a
                                  maximum of $15,000; or
                           ▪      A tier two fee of $100 plus
                                  0.2% of the estimated
                                  project cost, up to a
                                  maximum of $5,000.

 Discharge fees        Each NPDES permit holder that is a       The fees were due by The act extends
 for holders of        public discharger or an industrial       January 30, 2024, and the fees and the
 NPDES permits         discharger with an average daily         January 30, 2025.     fee schedules to
                       discharge flow of 5,000 gallons or                             January 30, 2026,
                       more per day must pay an annual                                and January 30,
                       discharge fee based on the average                             2027.
                       daily discharge flow. There is a
                       separate fee schedule for public and
                       industrial dischargers.


P a g e | 258                                                                                          H.B. 96
                                                                                                 Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                     LSC                                  Legislative Budget Office



                                                                  Fee period under          Fee change under
    Type of fee                     Description
                                                                      prior law                  the act

 Surcharge for         A holder of an NPDES permit that is a    The surcharge was           The act extends
 major industrial      major industrial discharger must pay     required to be paid by      the surcharge to
 dischargers           an annual surcharge of $7,500.           January 30, 2024, and       January 30, 2026,
                                                                January 30, 2025.           and January 30,
                                                                                            2027.

 Discharge fee for     One category of public discharger        The fee was due by    The act extends
 specified exempt      and eight categories of industrial       January 30, 2024, and the fee to January
 dischargers           dischargers that are NPDES permit        January 30, 2025.     30, 2026, and
                       holders are exempt from the annual                             January 30, 2027.
                       discharge fees that are based on
                       average daily discharge flow.
                       Instead, they are required to pay an
                       annual discharge fee of $180.

 License fee for       A person is prohibited from              The fee for an initial      The act extends
 public water          operating or maintaining a public        license or a license        the initial license
 system license        water system without an annual           renewal applied             and license
                       license from OEPA. Applications for      through June 30,            renewal fee
                       initial licenses or license renewals     2026, and was               through June 30,
                       must be accompanied by a fee,            required to be paid         2028.
                       which is calculated using schedules      annually in January.
                       for the three basic categories of
                       public water systems.

 Fee for plan          Anyone who intends to construct,         The cap on the fee          The act extends
 approval to           install, or modify a public water        was $20,000 through         the $20,000 cap
 construct, install,   supply system must obtain approval       June 30, 2026, and          through June 30,
 or modify a           of the plans from OEPA. The fee for      $15,000 on and after        2028; the
 public water          the plan approval is $150 plus 0.35%     July 1, 2026.               $15,000 cap
 system                of the estimated project cost.                                       applies on and
                       However, continuing law sets a cap                                   after July 1, 2028.
                       on the fee.

 Fee on state          In accordance with two schedules,        The schedule with           The act extends
 certification of      OEPA charges a fee for evaluating        higher fees applied         the higher fee
 laboratories and      certain laboratories and laboratory      through June 30,            schedule through
 laboratory            personnel.                               2026, and the               June 30, 2028;
 personnel                                                      schedule with lower         the lower fee
                       An additional provision states that an
                                                                fees applied on and         schedule applies
                       individual laboratory cannot be
                                                                after July 1, 2026.         on and after July
                       assessed a fee more than once in a
                                                                                            1, 2028.
                       three-year period unless the person      The $500 additional
                       requests the addition of analytical      fee applied through         The act extends
                       methods or analysts, in which case       June 30, 2026.              the additional fee


P a g e | 259                                                                                            H.B. 96
                                                                                                   Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                       LSC                              Legislative Budget Office



                                                                   Fee period under       Fee change under
    Type of fee                     Description
                                                                       prior law               the act
                       the person must pay $500 for each                                  through June 30,
                       additional survey requested.                                       2028.

 Fee for               A person applying to OEPA to take an      A schedule with          The act extends
 examination for       examination for certification as an       higher fees applied      the higher fee
 certification as      operator of a water supply system or      through November         schedule through
 an operator of a      a wastewater system (class A and          30, 2026, and a          November 30,
 water supply          classes I-IV) must pay a fee at the       schedule with lower      2028; the lower
 system or             time an application is submitted in       fees applied on and      fee schedule
 wastewater            accordance with a statutory               after December 1,        applies on and
 system                schedule.                                 2026.                    after December 1,
                                                                                          2028.

 Application fee       A person applying for a permit (other     If the application is    The act extends
 for a permit          than an NPDES permit), a variance,        submitted through        the $100 fee
 (other than an        or plan approval under the Safe           June 30, 2026, the       through June 30,
 NPDES permit),        Drinking Water Law or the Water           fee was $100. The fee    2028; the $15 fee
 variance, or plan     Pollution Control Law must pay a          was $15 for an           applies on and
 approval              nonrefundable fee.                        application submitted    after July 1, 2028.
                                                                 on or after July 1,
                                                                 2026.

 Application fee       A person applying for an NPDES            If the application was   The act extends
 for an NPDES          permit must pay a nonrefundable           submitted through        the $200 fee
 permit                application fee.                          June 30, 2026, the       through June 30,
 (S)(1)(b)(i)                                                    fee was $200. The fee    2028; the $14 fee
                                                                 was $15 for an           applies on and
                                                                 application submitted    after July 1, 2028.
                                                                 on or after July 1,
                                                                 2026.

 Fees on the sale      A base fee of 50¢ per tire is levied on   Both fees were           The act extends
 of tires              the sale of tires to assist in the        scheduled to sunset      both fees through
                       cleanup of scrap tires.                   on June 30, 2026.        June 30, 2028.
                       An additional fee of 50¢ per tire is
                       levied to assist soil and water
                       conservation districts.


        The act also extends, for an additional two years, the period of validity for the fees levied
on the transfer and disposal of solid waste. Under prior law, all existing state imposed solid waste
transfer and disposal fees were scheduled to sunset on June 30, 2026. The act extends these fees
through June 30, 2028.



P a g e | 260                                                                                          H.B. 96
                                                                                                 Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                   LSC                             Legislative Budget Office



  Additional air pollution control fee increases
  (R.C. 3745.11)
         The act increases, by 50%, the fees related to OEPA’s air pollution control program,
specifically for permits to install. It also creates an additional annual fee of $5,000 charged to
Title V air pollution control permit holders in addition to the existing emission-based annual fees.
  Infectious waste generator fee
   (R.C. 3734.021)
       The act eliminates the $140 infectious waste generator registration application and
renewal fee. Under continuing law, each generator of 50 pounds or more of infectious waste in
any one month must register with OEPA.
  Industrial water pollution control facility certificate
   (R.C. 3745.11(P); conforming changes in R.C. 3734.05, 3734.79, 5709.212, 6111.01, and
   6111.04)
         The act eliminates the application fee of 0.5% of the total exempt facility project costs,
not to exceed $2,000, for an industrial water pollution control facility that files for a certificate to
exempt the facility from certain taxes. Additionally, it eliminates a $500 application fee for an
industrial water pollution control certificate that applied to industrial water pollution control
facilities under law in effect until June 26, 2003.
Waste facility permit notification
(R.C. 3734.05)
       The act allows the OEPA Director to give notification of the required public hearing
regarding a solid waste facility permit application or infectious waste treatment facility permit
application either via newspaper publication or publication on the OEPA website. Prior law
allowed notification only in a newspaper.
E-Check
  E-Check extension
  (R.C. 3704.14)
        The act continues the operation of the motor vehicle inspection and maintenance
program (E-Check) in the seven counties where it currently operates (Cuyahoga, Geauga, Lake,
Lorain, Medina, Portage, and Summit). It does so by authorizing the OEPA Director to request the
Director of Administrative Services (DAS Director) to extend the existing contract (with the
contractor that conducts the program) beginning July 1, 2025, for a period of up to 24 months.
        Continuing law requires the OEPA Director to request the DAS Director to enter into a
contract with a vendor to operate a decentralized E-Check program through June 30, 2027. The
act eliminates law that allowed OEPA to renew that contract for a period of up to 24 months
through June 30, 2029.



P a g e | 261                                                                                     H.B. 96
                                                                                            Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                LSC                            Legislative Budget Office



       It also requires the decentralized E-Check program to ensure an equivalent amount of
emissions reductions as the centralized program. Prior law required the decentralized program
achieve at least the same emission reductions as the centralized program.
       Additionally, the act requires the OEPA Director, if USEPA determines that the E-check
program is not necessary for Ohio or any area of Ohio to comply with the federal Clean Air Act,
to immediately discontinue the program and take any actions necessary to effectuate its
termination.
  E-Check review and report
  (Section 737.10)
       The act requires the OEPA Director to conduct a review to assess the E-check program.
The Director must include the following in the review:
        1. A determination of the necessity of the program;
       2. An evaluation of whether each county that is subject to the program during the prior
calendar year has achieved, and has the ability to maintain, compliance with federal ozone
standards without implementation of the program in that county;
       3. An analysis of whether a revision to Ohio’s state implementation plan could be
submitted to USEPA to discontinue the program while maintaining compliance with national
ambient air quality standards (and if so, the OEPA Director must formally submit a request to
USEPA for reconsideration of the program’s implementation in affected regions);
        4. After proper monitoring, an analysis of weather patterns over northeast Ohio and the
entire Great Lakes region with respect to how those patterns impact ozone levels, air circulation,
and overall emissions; and
        5. Any potential alternative measures for maintaining air quality if the program is altered
or discontinued.
       By March 30, 2027, the Director must compile the findings of the review into a report and
submit it to the General Assembly. The Director also must make the report available to the public
on OEPA’s website.
Air nuisance rule
(R.C. 3704.0310)
        The act requires the OEPA Director, if Ohio’s state implementation plan required under
the federal Clean Air Act includes an air nuisance rule, to remove the air nuisance rule from the
plan and to take such steps as are necessary to do so. Additionally, on or after September 30,
2025, the Director cannot include an air nuisance rule in the state implementation plan, or rely
on an air nuisance rule to implement or enforce ambient air quality standards adopted pursuant
to the federal Clean Air Act.
       Under federal law, each state must adopt and submit a state implementation plan
regarding national ambient air quality standards to the USEPA Administrator for approval. Any


P a g e | 262                                                                                 H.B. 96
                                                                                        Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                  LSC                             Legislative Budget Office



person may commence a civil action against any person alleged to have violated or be in violation
of an approved state implementation plan.
        An “air nuisance rule” is a rule adopted by the Director that declares any of the following
to be a public nuisance:
       1. The emission or escape into the open air from any source or sources whatsoever, of
smoke, ashes, dust, dirt, grime, acids, fumes, gases, vapors, or any other substances or
combinations of substances, in such manner or in such amount as to endanger the health, safety,
or welfare of the public, or cause unreasonable injury or damage to property;
       2. The emission or escape into the open air from any source or sources of odors
whatsoever that is subject to regulation under the air pollution control law and is operated in
such a manner to emit such amounts of odor so as to endanger the health, safety, or welfare of
the public, or cause unreasonable injury or damage to property; or
        3. Activities that are substantially similar to those described in (1) and (2).69
Community air monitoring
(R.C. 3704.01, 3704.03, 3704.031, 3704.09, and 3704.111)
        The act establishes requirements governing community air monitoring, which is any
measurement or quantification of ambient air concentrations of an air contaminant other than
any of the following:
    ▪ Monitoring conducted using monitoring devices identified in the most recent approved
        version of the USEPA’s “List of Designated Reference and Equivalent Methods”;
    ▪ Monitoring conducted using monitoring devices identified in the most recent approved
        version of the USEPA’s “Air Monitoring Network Plan” that are legally installed and
        operated;
    ▪ Any measurement or quantification of ambient air concentrations of an air contaminant
        that is specifically identified or described in and either required or allowed to be used for
        the particular air contaminant source or source category for which it is being used under
        federal law or an implementation plan, permit, variance, order issued prior to
        September 30, 2025; and
    ▪ Any monitoring system installed and used by the OEPA or by a local air pollution control
        authority under the terms of a delegation agreement.
       For sources where no specific monitoring requirement is otherwise specified in law, the
act prohibits the OEPA Director from imposing a condition in a permit that requires community
air monitoring, unless otherwise agreed to by the owner or air operator and the Director.
Additionally, the Director cannot require an applicant for a permit for an air contaminant source
to conduct community air monitoring prior to the issuance or renewal of a permit or a variance.



69 42 U.S.C. 7410 and 7604.



P a g e | 263                                                                                     H.B. 96
                                                                                            Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                LSC                            Legislative Budget Office



       Under the act, data produced from community air monitoring cannot be used as evidence
to support either:
      1. A fine, penalty, or notice of violation against any person for violations of or
noncompliance with any federal or state air pollution regulation; or
        2. An administrative, regulatory, or judicial enforcement action, lawsuit, or proceeding
for violations of, or noncompliance with, any federal or state air pollution regulation.
        In addition, OEPA or a local air pollution control authority may not consider or rely on
data produced from community air monitoring in any rulemaking action or in any action relating
to issuing an installation permit or operating permit, unless the consideration or reliance is
requested by the owner or operator of the air contaminant source requesting the permit. Finally,
the Director may not enter into a contract with a private agency for the establishment, operation,
or maintenance of community air monitoring where the intended use of the data produced by
the monitoring stations and other devices would violate (1) or (2) above or the prohibition against
relying on community air monitoring data in a rulemaking action or other action related to issuing
a permit.




P a g e | 264                                                                                 H.B. 96
                                                                                        Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                  LSC                            Legislative Budget Office




            FACILITIES CONSTRUCTION COMMISSION
School facilities programs
  Classroom Facilities Assistance Program
    ▪ Requires the calculation of a school district’s share for a Classroom Facilities Assistance
        Program project to be based solely on the required percentage based on the district’s
        equity ranking.
    ▪ Requires a district that segments its classroom facilities needs to calculate the required
        percentage based on equity ranking on the date the Controlling Board approves the first
        segment for both that segment and future segments.
  Vocational School Facilities Assistance Program
    ▪ Permits the Facilities Construction Commission (FCC) to set aside a portion of its school
        facilities funds each biennium to assist at least two joint vocational school districts.
Public improvements contracts
  Electronic notices, advertisements, and filings
    ▪ Requires several types of notices or advertisements to be sent via electronic media.
    ▪ Requires FCC to make copies of the plans, details, estimates of cost, and specifications
        available electronically.
    ▪ Removes the requirement that a public authority file a notice of commencement of a
        public improvement in affidavit form.
    ▪ Permits a bidder for most contracts with the state or a political subdivision to file a bid
        guaranty by electronic verification through an electronic verification and security system,
        if the state or political subdivision accepts bids electronically.
  Declaration of exigency
    ▪ Requires that, when the FCC Executive Director issues a declaration of public exigency at
        the request of a state agency, the director of the state agency, at the determination of
        the FCC Executive Director, must enter into a contract with the proper persons to address
        the exigency.
  Building information modeling systems
    ▪ For public works contracts of $200,000 or more, permits a public authority to require an
        architect or engineer, in preparing plans, details, specifications, estimates, analyses, or
        other data, to use a building information model system, if the system is based on a
        nationally recognized standard for building information models.
    ▪ Defines “building information model” as a digital representation of physical and
        functional characteristics of a facility, and electronic files used to design and coordinate
        the project, whether it is a single model or multiple models used in the aggregate.


P a g e | 265                                                                                   H.B. 96
                                                                                          Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                 LSC                            Legislative Budget Office



Public improvements contracts retainage and escrow
    ▪ For partial payments on a public improvements contract, decreases the public authority’s
        required retainage amount from 8% of the contractor’s estimate to 4% or less, but repeals
        a requirement that the public authority retain 0% after the job is 50% completed.
    ▪ Prohibits contractors from paying subcontractors at a retainage rate lower than the rate
        being paid to the contractor by the public authority.
    ▪ Repeals law requiring the public authority to deposit the retained amount in an escrow
        account.
    ▪ Clarifies that retained funds and the interest accrued on them is property of the
        contractor, and must be paid to the contractor within 30 days after the substantial
        completion of the work, withholding only funds reasonably necessary to ensure final
        completion of the work.
    ▪ Requires the remaining funds, and interest, to be released to the contractor within
        30 days of final completion of the work.
Expedited processes for design-build firms and managers at risk
    ▪ For contracts between public authorities and construction managers at risk or design-
        build firms, creates an expedited proposal and selection process for projects under
        $4 million.
    ▪ Permits construction managers at risk or design-build firms, for contracts under
        $4 million, to submit both an initial qualification proposal or statement along with a
        pricing proposal, instead of sending them in separate rounds.
    ▪ Requires the public authority to have a pre-proposal meeting with any such contractors
        who desire to jointly submit a statement or proposal and pricing proposal.
    ▪ Exempts these contractors from the requirement to submit a sealed bid to self-perform
        a portion of work before accepting opening any bids for the same work when the public
        authority requests a guaranteed maximum price proposal due at the time of selection.


School facilities programs
  Classroom Facilities Assistance Program
  (R.C. 3318.032)
        The act revises the calculation of a school district’s share for its Classroom Facilities
Assistance Program (CFAP) project. It requires that the district’s portion be calculated solely using
the percentage based on its equity ranking. Under former law, the district’s portion was the
greater of either the required percentage based on its equity ranking or an amount necessary to
raise the school district’s net bonded indebtedness to a prescribed level.



P a g e | 266                                                                                  H.B. 96
                                                                                         Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                   LSC                             Legislative Budget Office



       It also requires that, for a district that segments its classroom facilities needs, the district’s
portion for each segment be determined using the required percentage based on its equity
ranking on the date the Controlling Board approves its first segment.
  Vocational school facilities assistance program
  (R.C. 3318.40 and 3318.12)
       The act changes how the Facilities Construction Commission (FCC) allocates funding for
the Vocational School Facilities Assistance Program. Specifically, it eliminates FCC’s authority to
annually set aside up to 2% of its aggregate funds to provide school facilities assistance to joint
vocational school districts (JVSDs). Instead, the act permits FCC to set aside “a portion” of its
aggregate school facilities assistance funds each biennium to assist at least two JVSDs.
Public improvements contracts
  Electronic notices, advertisements, and filings
  (R.C. 9.312, 9.331, 153.07, 153.09, 153.54, and 1311.252)
       The act requires certain notices, advertisements, and filings to be made via electronic
media, rather than through various physical media like newspapers.
      Competitive bidding notices
        For contracts let by competitive bidding, when a state agency or political subdivision finds
that a low bidder is not responsive or responsible, the act requires the state agency or political
subdivision to send the bidder a notice in writing by an internet identifier of record associated
with the bidder (such as an email address), and by certified mail only if an electronic method is
not available. Former law permitted either method.
      Public improvements notices and advertisements
       For contracts to employ a construction manager or a construction manager at risk, the
act requires a public authority to advertise its intended contract by electronic means, and permits
advertising in news media available in the county. Former law was the opposite: it required
advertisement in a newspaper and permitted electronic advertisement.
        The act reduces the required advance publication of the notice from 30 days to 14 days.
       For public improvements contracts, the act requires the public authority to give notice of
the time and place where bids will be received by electronic means at least 14 days in advance,
and permits the authority to publish the notice in other news media in the county where the
work is to occur. Former law required publication in a newspaper at least eight days in advance.
       The act also requires plans, details, estimates of cost, and specifications to be available
electronically, as well for physical inspection at the FCC’s office under continuing law.
        When the public authority rejects all bids and re-advertises, the advertisement must be
in electronic media, rather than newspaper, as FCC directs.




P a g e | 267                                                                                     H.B. 96
                                                                                            Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                 LSC                            Legislative Budget Office



      Notices of commencement
        The act removes the requirement that the notice of commencement be in affidavit form.
A notice of commencement contains details about the work to be performed, the contractor, the
public authority, and the bid guaranty.
      Bid guaranties
        The act permits a bidder for most contracts with the state or a political subdivision to file
a bid guaranty in the form of an electronic verification through an electronic verification and
security system, if the state or political subdivision accepts bids electronically. Continuing law
also permits the bidder to file it in the form of a bond, certified check, cashier’s check, or letter
of credit. Under continuing law, this requirement does not apply to contracts with construction
managers at risk and design build firms.
  Declaration of exigency
  (R.C. 123.10)
       The act requires the director of a state agency, when the FCC Executive Director issues a
declaration of public exigency at the state agency’s request, and at the determination of the FCC
Executive Director, to enter into a contract with the proper persons to address the exigency.
       Continuing law permits the FCC Executive Director, upon the Director’s own initiative or
at the request of a state agency director, state institution of higher education, or state
instrumentality, to issue a declaration of public exigency in the event of one of the following:
    ▪ An injury or obstruction that occurs in any public works of the state and that materially
        impairs its immediate use or places in jeopardy property adjacent to it;
    ▪ An immediate danger of such an injury or obstruction; or
    ▪ An injury or obstruction, or an immediate danger of an injury or obstruction, that occurs
        in any public works of the state and that materially impairs its immediate use or places in
        jeopardy property adjacent to it.
        Former law required only the FCC Executive Director to contract with proper persons to
alleviate or respond to the exigency.
         The act continues to require the FCC Executive Director to enter into these contracts
when the Executive Director issued the declaration of exigency at the Executive Director’s own
initiative. But it permits the Executive Director, when the Executive Director issued the
declaration at the request of one of the state bodies listed above, to require the state body to
enter into the contract instead.
  Building information modeling systems
  (R.C. 153.01)
       The act permits a public authority, for public improvements contracts worth $200,000 or
more, to require an architect or engineer, in preparing plans, details, specifications, estimates,



P a g e | 268                                                                                  H.B. 96
                                                                                         Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                LSC                            Legislative Budget Office



analyses, or other data, to use a building information model system, if the system is based on a
nationally recognized standard for building information models.
       The act defines a “building information model” as a digital representation of physical and
functional characteristics of a facility, and electronic files used to design and coordinate the
project, whether it is a single model or multiple models used together.
Public improvements contracts retainage and escrow
(R.C. 153.12, 153.13, 153.14, and 153.63)
      The act makes changes to the process by which contractors are paid for completing public
improvements contracts.
        Under former law, the public authority had to pay 92% of the contract price for labor
performed before and up to the point when the job was 50% completed. After it was 50%
completed, the public entity had to pay 100% of the contract price during the remaining 50% of
the project, and deposit the 8% that had been collected into an escrow account. When the major
portion of the project was substantially completed and occupied, or in use, or otherwise
accepted, the retained amount, with accumulated interest, was released from escrow and paid
to the contractor within 30 days of completion of the contract.
        The act changes this process in the following ways: first, instead of 8% being retained for
the first half of the contract, 4% or less is retained for the entirety of the contract. The total
amount being retained is the same, and perhaps less if the public authority so chooses.
        Second, the act removes the escrow account requirement, instead merely specifying that
the public authority must release the amount to the primary contractor upon, and within 30 days
of, substantial completion of the work, retaining a portion of the funds as reasonably necessary
for final completion of the project. These remaining withheld funds, and any interest, must then
be released to the primary contractor within 30 days of final completion. The act clarifies that
the retained funds and the accrued interest are the property of the contractor.
       Finally, the act prohibits contractors from paying subcontractors at a retainage rate lower
than the rate paid to the contractor by the public authority. For instance, if FCC is paying a
contractor at a retainage rate of 97% (withholding 3%), the contractor is not permitted to pay a
subcontractor at a retainage rate of 96% (withholding 4%). In other words, the contractor may
not retain more from a subcontract than is being retained from the contractor’s contract.
Expedited processes for design-build firms and managers at risk
(R.C. 9.334, 153.501, and 153.693)
       The act creates an expedited proposal and selection process for contracts between public
authorities and construction managers at risk or design-build firms, for projects under $4 million.
       Under the expedited process, the construction managers at risk or design-build firms may
submit both an initial qualification proposal or statement, respectively, and a pricing proposal in
the same submission. Former law required, and continuing law requires, in the case of contracts
worth more than $4 million, the manager or firm to submit a proposal or statement, then for the
public authority to rank and select at least three firms from the submissions, who then must

P a g e | 269                                                                                 H.B. 96
                                                                                        Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting               LSC                           Legislative Budget Office



submit a pricing proposal. After the proposal is submitted, the public authority must hold
discussions with each applicant before making a final selection.
       The act permits these contractors to submit both proposal or statement and a pricing
proposal at once for contracts under $4 million, and also requires a public authority to provide
each such contractor using the expedited process with a pre-proposal meeting to explore the
proposals further, in which the public authority provides the manager or firm with a description
of the project, including the scope and nature of the proposed services and potential technical
approaches.
        Under the standard process, the manager or firm submits a proposal or statement of
qualifications, is selected to move on, has a meeting with the public authority, and then submits
a pricing proposal for final approval.
        Under the expedited process, an interested manager or firm has a pre-proposal meeting
with the public authority, then submits a proposal or statement of qualifications along with a
pricing proposal. The public authority reviews the initial qualification proposal or statement,
selects a certain number of managers or firms for the next round, reviews the pricing proposals
only of those selected, and then continues the negotiation and selection process from there.
        The act also exempts these contractors from the requirement to submit a sealed bid to
self-perform a portion of the work if the public authority requests a guaranteed maximum price
proposal due at the time of selection. This essentially means that a manager or firm may more
easily subcontract with themselves if they have agreed to a certain price cap.




P a g e | 270                                                                               H.B. 96
                                                                                      Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                 LSC                        Legislative Budget Office




                                       GOVERNOR
    ▪ Would have prohibited the Governor from proposing a budget that carries into the new
        fiscal biennium a GRF cash balance that exceeds the required ending fund balance
        (VETOED).
    ▪ Authorizes the Governor and former Governors of Ohio to solemnize marriages.


Governor’s budget proposal – cash balance (VETOED)
(R.C. 107.03)
       The act would have prohibited the Governor from submitting a state budget to the
General Assembly that proposed a GRF beginning cash balance exceeding the ending fund
balance required by law. Under continuing law, at the end of a fiscal year, OBM must determine
the surplus revenue from the fiscal year and transfer most of the unobligated, unencumbered
amount of that surplus revenue from the GRF first to the Budget Stabilization Fund and then to
the Expanded Sales Tax Holiday Fund.70
Governor solemnizing marriages
(R.C. 3101.08)
       The act authorizes the Governor and former Governors of Ohio to solemnize marriages.
Continuing law authorizes the following persons to solemnize marriages:
    ▪ An ordained or licensed minister of any religious society or congregation within Ohio who
        is licensed to solemnize marriages;
    ▪ A judge of a county court;
    ▪ A judge of a municipal court;
    ▪ A probate judge;
    ▪ The mayor of a municipal corporation within Ohio;
    ▪ The Superintendent of Ohio deaf and blind education services;
    Any religious society in conformity with the rules of its church.




70 R.C. 131.44, not in the act.



P a g e | 271                                                                              H.B. 96
                                                                                     Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                 LSC                            Legislative Budget Office




                             DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
Nurse aide eligibility
    ▪ Establishes an alternative condition that an individual may satisfy to be eligible for
        employment as a nurse aide in a long-term care facility – that the individual has
        successfully completed both a training course provided in a nursing home operated by
        the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs and a competency evaluation program conducted
        by the Department of Health (ODH).
Health care facilities
  Residential care facility license – continued operation during
  application period
    ▪ Specifies that a residential facility or independent living facility that applies for a license
        to operate as a residential care (assisted living) facility may continue to operate as a
        residential facility or independent living facility while its application is pending.
    ▪ Restricts a residential facility or independent living facility from providing care to more
        than two residents while the application is pending.
  Facility fees – hospital-owned primary care medical practices
    ▪ Beginning January 1, 2028, prohibits, with certain exceptions, a hospital-owned primary
        care medical practice from requiring a self-pay individual or third-party payor to pay a
        facility fee in connection with any primary care service provided at the practice.
  Radiation-generating equipment inspection fees
    ▪ Increases inspection fees for certain radiation-generating equipment used in certain
        medical facilities.
School-based health center funds
    ▪ Requires the funds earmarked to support school-based health centers to be used by ODH,
        in consultation with the Department of Education and Workforce, in high-need counties.
    ▪ Requires, prior to establishing a patient-provider relationship with a minor, a
        school-based health center to obtain general consent from the child’s parent, guardian,
        or other person authorized to consent to the child’s medical care.
Youth homelessness funds (PARTIALLY VETOED)
    ▪ Prohibits the distribution of funds earmarked to address homelessness in youth and
        pregnant women to youth shelters that promote social gender transition.
    ▪ Would have additionally prohibited the distribution of these funds to youth shelters that
        affirm social gender transition (VETOED).




P a g e | 272                                                                                  H.B. 96
                                                                                         Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                 LSC                         Legislative Budget Office



Abortion
  Reporting changes
    ▪ Changes the annual deadline for ODH’s report regarding abortions during the previous
        calendar year from September 30 to March 1.
    ▪ Clarifies that the physician abortion reporting requirement under continuing law
        (1) applies to abortions performed by both surgical procedure and abortion-inducing
        drugs, and (2) must include each pregnant woman’s state of residence in addition to zip
        code.
    ▪ Requires hospital monthly and annual abortion reports under continuing law to include
        the total number of Ohio residents versus non-Ohio residents who have undergone a
        post-12-week abortion and received postabortion care.
    ▪ Changes the deadline for ODH’s annual report on abortion data from the previous year to
        March 1 and clarifies that the report must include the number performed on Ohio
        residents and the number performed on nonresidents.
    ▪ Requires ODH to develop a public electronic dashboard and publish monthly abortion
        data that includes specified information.
    ▪ Requires the annual report and monthly dashboard to be updated to include the total
        number of abortions performed on minors by each facility in the categories of under
        age 16 and ages 16 and 17.
    ▪ Requires that the annual report and monthly dashboard update and sort by age the total
        number of previous abortions the woman has undergone and the total number of in-state
        versus out-of-state women who had abortions.
  Genetic Services funds
    ▪ Eliminates the exception authorizing ODH Genetics Services funds to be used to counsel
        or refer for abortion in the case of a medical emergency.
Deposit of vital statistics fees
    ▪ Transfers from the Treasurer of State to ODH the duty to deposit vital statistics fees into
        the state treasury to the credit of the Children’s Trust Fund.
Program for Children and Youth with Special Health Care Needs
    ▪ Extends the age limit for the Program for Children and Youth with Special Health Care
        Needs from 25 to 26.
OhioSEE Program
    ▪ Requires ODH to establish the Ohio Student Eye Exam Program, or OhioSEE, to provide
        students in grades K to 3 with vision care services, including vision screenings, eye
        examinations, and glasses.



P a g e | 273                                                                               H.B. 96
                                                                                      Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                  LSC                        Legislative Budget Office



Type 1 diabetes informational materials
    ▪   Requires ODH to create informational materials on type 1 diabetes for parents, guardians,
        educators, and other persons having care or charge of children.
    ▪ Requires schools that serve elementary school students to provide an electronic or paper
        copy of those materials to each student’s parent or guardian.
Medical certificates of death
    ▪ Revises the law governing medical certificates of death, including by (1) extending the
        timeline by which a certificate must be completed and signed and (2) authorizing in some
        circumstances the physician who last examined or treated a decedent to certify the
        decedent’s cause of death.
340B covered entity reporting requirements (PARTIALLY
VETOED)
    ▪ Imposes reporting requirements on covered entities participating in the federal 340B
        Drug Pricing Program.
    ▪ Would have required offsite facilities associated with the covered entities to also comply
        with the reporting requirements (VETOED).
Lead abatement tax credit
    ▪ Increases from $10,000 to $40,000 the maximum lead abatement tax credit certificate
        that may be issued by the ODH Director.
    ▪ Reduces from $5 million to $3 million the total amount of lead abatement tax credit
        certificates the Director may issue in any fiscal year.
Household sewage treatment systems (PARTIALLY VETOED)
  Evaluating sewage treatment system compliance (PARTIALLY
  VETOED)
    ▪ Would have required the ODH Director to adopt rules that establish statistical methods
        for evaluating sewage treatment system (STS) compliance for a 12-inch soil depth credit
        relative to bacterial parameters that are derived from a minimum of 144 consecutive data
        points (VETOED).
    ▪ Would have prohibited the ODH Director from implementing or enforcing any special
        device approval or similar policy that imposes additional requirements or restrictions on
        an STS or component of an STS that combines the treatment of effluent with subsurface
        dispersal of treated effluent directly to the soil (PARTIALLY VETOED).
    ▪ As a result of the Governor’s partial veto, specifically authorizes the ODH Director to
        implement or enforce any special device approval or similar policy imposing additional
        requirements or restrictions on an STS or component of an STS that combines the
        treatment of effluent with subsurface dispersal of treated effluent directly to the soil.


P a g e | 274                                                                               H.B. 96
                                                                                      Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                  LSC                             Legislative Budget Office



  Household sewage treatment system – soil and slope inspection
  (VETOED)
    ▪ Would have prohibited the ODH Director from adopting rules requiring a soil evaluator or
        soil scientist to evaluate the soil type and slope with respect to a household sewage
        treatment system or a proposed household sewage treatment system (VETOED).


Nurse aide eligibility
(R.C. 3721.32)
        The act establishes an additional condition that an individual may satisfy to be eligible for
employment as a nurse aide in a long-term care facility – in this case, the successful completion
of both: (1) a training course provided by the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) in a VA-
operated community living center (a VA nursing home) that the Director of Health determines is
similar to a training and competency evaluation program conducted by the Department of Health
(ODH) and (2) an ODH-conducted competency evaluation program.
        In general, to be listed on ODH’s nurse aide registry and therefore eligible for employment
in a long-term care facility, an individual must successfully complete both an ODH-approved
training and competency evaluation program and an ODH-conducted competency evaluation
program.
Health care facilities
  Residential care facility license – continued operation during
  application period
  (R.C. 3721.074)
         The act specifies that when a residential facility or an independent living facility applies
to the ODH Director for a license as a residential care facility (generally referred to as an assisted
living facility), the facility may continue to operate while the application is under consideration
by the Director. The act prohibits a residential facility or independent living facility from providing
care to more than two residents while the application is pending.
  Facility fees – hospital-owned primary care medical practices
  (R.C. 3727.46)
         Effective January 1, 2028, the act prohibits a medical practice specializing in primary care
that is owned or operated by a hospital or hospital system from requiring a self-pay individual or
third-party payor to pay a facility fee in connection with any primary care service provided to a
patient at the practice. The prohibition, however, applies only if both of the following are the
case:
    ▪ The medical practice was owned or operated solely by a physician or group of physicians
        at the time of its purchase by the hospital or system;
    ▪ The hospital or system purchased the medical practice after January 1, 2010.

P a g e | 275                                                                                    H.B. 96
                                                                                           Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                 LSC                            Legislative Budget Office



      The act also states that the facility fee prohibition is not to be construed to apply to a
medical practice specializing in primary care that is established by a hospital or hospital system.
        For purposes of the prohibition, the act defines facility fee to mean the portion of a bill
for health care treatment that covers all the costs of delivering patient care, except for those that
are billed by one or more physicians and other professionals.
  Radiation-generating equipment inspection fees
  (R.C. 3748.13)
      The act doubles, as follows, inspection fee amounts for certain radiation-generating
equipment used in facilities operated by medical practitioners or medical-practitioner groups:
    ▪ For a first dental x-ray tube, from $155 to $310;
    ▪ For each additional dental x-ray tube at the same location, from $77 to $154;
    ▪ For a first medical x-ray tube, from $307 to $614;
    ▪ For each additional medical x-ray tube at the same location, from $163 to $326;
    ▪ For each unit of ionizing radiation-generating equipment capable of operating at or above
        250 kilovoltage peak, from $610 to $1,220;
    ▪ For a first nonionizing radiation-generating equipment of any kind, from $307 to $614;
    ▪ For each additional nonionizing radiation-generating equipment of any kind at the same
        location, from $163 to $326.
        The act maintains the inspection fee schedules.
School-based health center funds
(Section 291.20)
        The act requires the funds earmarked to support school-based health centers to be used
by ODH, in consultation with the Department of Education and Workforce, in high-need counties,
as determined by those departments. Before establishing a patient-provider relationship with a
minor, a school-based health center must obtain general consent to treat the child from the
child’s parent, legal guardian, grandparent acting under a caretaker authorization affidavit, or
other person authorized to consent to the child’s medical care. This does not apply in emergency
situations, first aid, other unanticipated minor health care services, or health care services
provided pursuant to a student’s individualized education program (IEP) or a school district’s
obligation under Section 504 of the federal Rehabilitation Act.
Youth homelessness funds (PARTIALLY VETOED)
(Section 291.20)
        The act prohibits the distribution of funds earmarked to address homelessness in youth
and pregnant women to youth shelters that promote social gender transition, in which an
individual goes from identifying with and living as a gender that corresponds to the individual’s
biological sex to identifying with and living as a gender different from the individual’s biological

P a g e | 276                                                                                  H.B. 96
                                                                                         Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                 LSC                            Legislative Budget Office



sex. The Governor vetoed language that would have prohibited the distribution of these funds to
youth shelters that affirm social gender transition.
Abortion
  Reporting changes
  (R.C. 2919.171 and 3701.79)
        The act changes to March 1, from September 30 under former law, the date by which
ODH must issue a public report required under law unchanged by the act on statistics for all
abortion reports it receives from the previous calendar year. Under law unchanged by the act,
ODH must ensure that none of the information in the report could reasonably lead to the
identification of any pregnant woman upon whom an abortion is performed.
       Continuing law requires a physician who performs or induces or attempts to perform or
induce an abortion to complete an individual abortion report for each abortion. The act clarifies
that the requirement applies to abortions performed by both surgical procedure and abortion-
inducing drugs. Further, it specifies that the statutorily required information to be included in the
report must include the pregnant woman’s state of residence in addition to her zip code (as
required under continuing law).
       The monthly and annual abortion reports hospitals must file under continuing law for
women who have undergone a post-12-week abortion and received postabortion care must,
under the act, include the total number of Ohio residents and the total number non-Ohio
residents.
        The act changes the date to March 1, from October 1 under former law, by which ODH
must issue its annual report on abortion data from the previous year. Additionally, it requires
ODH to develop a public electronic dashboard to publish monthly the abortion data reported to
it. The annual report and monthly dashboard update must include, in addition to information
required under continuing law, the following information:
    ▪ The number of abortions performed on Ohio residents and the number performed on out-
        of-state residents, which under the act must be sorted by the age of the woman on whom
        the abortion was performed, as described below;
    ▪ The number of zygotes, blastocytes, embryos, or fetuses previously aborted by the
        woman must also be sorted by the woman’s age;
    ▪ The number of abortions performed on minors by each facility in the categories of under
        age 16 and ages 16 to 17.
       The act changes three of the age categories for reporting the ages of women on whom an
abortion was performed to the following:
    ▪ Under 16, rather than under 15;
    ▪ 16 to 17, rather than 15 to 19;
    ▪ 18 to 24, rather than 20 to 25.

P a g e | 277                                                                                  H.B. 96
                                                                                         Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                 LSC                           Legislative Budget Office



        The remaining age categories are unchanged:
    ▪ 25 to 29;
    ▪ 30 to 34;
    ▪ 35 to 39;
    ▪ 40 to 45;
    ▪ 45 and older.
  Genetics Services funds
  (R.C. 3701.511; Section 291.20)
        The act prohibits the use of ODH Genetics Services funds to counsel or refer for abortion.
Former law allowed the use of ODH Genetic Services funds to counsel or refer for abortion only
in the case of a medical emergency.
Deposit of vital statistics fees by ODH
(R.C. 3109.14)
        The act transfers a requirement to deposit vital statistics fees into the state treasury to
the credit of the Children’s Trust Fund from the Treasurer of State to ODH. Under continuing
laws, state and local officials must collect a $3 fee for each certified copy of a birth record,
certification of birth, and copy of a death record and forward the fees to ODH. The act requires
ODH to deposit the fees into the Children’s Trust Fund within two days after receipt. ODH
previously had to forward the fees to the Treasurer of State, who deposited them accordingly.
        The act also requires ODH to deposit any penalty it receives in the state treasury to the
credit of the Children’s Trust Fund. Continuing law imposes a penalty of 10% of the fees on any
person or government entity that fails to forward the vital statistics fees in a timely manner, as
determined by ODH.
Program for Children and Youth with Special Health Care Needs
(R.C. 3701.021; Section 291.10)
        The act requires the ODH Director to increase from 25 to 26 the maximum age of an
individual who can be served by the Program for Children and Youth with Special Health Care
Needs. This increase does not apply to the diagnostic component of the program.
        Also referred to as the Complex Medical Help Program by ODH, the program serves
families of children and young adults with special health care needs, including AIDS, hearing loss,
cancer, juvenile arthritis, cerebral palsy, metabolic disorders, cleft lip/palate, severe vision
disorders, cystic fibrosis, sickle cell disease, diabetes, spina bifida, scoliosis, congenital heart
disease, hemophilia, and chronic lung disease.
        The program has three core components:




P a g e | 278                                                                                 H.B. 96
                                                                                        Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                     LSC                              Legislative Budget Office



    ▪ Diagnostic – an individual under age 21 who meets medical criteria, regardless of income,
        may receive services from program-approved providers for up to six months to diagnose
        or rule out a special health care need or establish a plan of care;
    ▪ Treatment – an individual who meets both medical and financial criteria may receive
        treatment from program-approved providers for an eligible condition;
    ▪ Service coordination – the family of an individual who meets medical criteria, regardless
        of income, may receive assistance locating and coordinating services for the individual
        with the medical diagnosis.71
OhioSEE Program
(Section 291.30)
       The act requires ODH to administer the Ohio Student Eye Exam Program, to be known as
the OhioSEE Program, to provide vision care services, including vision screenings, eye
examinations, and glasses, to Ohio students in grades K to 3 in FYs 2026 and 2027. Participating
students must have failed vision screenings and lack access to follow-up care. ODH must focus
on improving the percentage of vision care referrals completed, increasing student access to eye
examinations, and providing necessary eyewear to eligible students
Type 1 diabetes informational materials
(R.C. 3313.7118, 3314.03, 3326.11, and 3707.61)
  ODH requirements
        Under the act, ODH must create informational materials on type 1 diabetes for parents,
guardians, educators, and other persons having care or charge of children. The materials must
include pertinent information to inform and educate them about type 1 diabetes in children,
including the following:
    ▪   A description of type 1 diabetes;
    ▪   A description of type 1 diabetes risk factors and warning signs;
    ▪   A recommendation that the parents or guardian of a student who is displaying type 1
        diabetes warning signs should immediately consult with the student’s primary care
        provider to determine if immediate screening is appropriate;




71 Service coordination information published on the ODH website indicates that eligible applicants must

be under age 21 (Service Coordination Program, which may be accessed by conducting a keyword “service
coordination” search on ODH’s website: odh.ohio.gov). However, R.C. 3701.023(D) requires ODH to
authorize necessary service coordination for each eligible child, and R.C. 3701.021(D) prohibits the
Director from specifying an age restriction that excludes from eligibility an individual who is younger than
25.

P a g e | 279                                                                                        H.B. 96
                                                                                               Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                 LSC                           Legislative Budget Office



    ▪   A description of the type 1 diabetes screening process, the significance of the three stages
        of type 1 diabetes, and the implications of test results identifying the presence of each
        stage; and
    ▪   A recommendation that, following a diagnosis of type 1 diabetes, the student’s parents
        or guardian should consult with the student’s primary care provider to develop an
        appropriate treatment plan, which may include consultation with and examination by a
        specialty care provider, including a properly qualified endocrinologist.
       ODH must make the informational materials available on its website in a format suitable
for easy downloading and printing.
  School requirements
       The act requires school districts, community schools, STEM schools, and chartered
nonpublic schools that serve elementary school students to provide either an electronic or paper
copy of the ODH type 1 diabetes informational materials to each student’s parent or guardian
upon the student’s enrollment in elementary school.
Medical certificates of death
(R.C. 3705.16 and 4731.22)
         The act makes several changes to the law governing medical certificates of death. First, it
clarifies that the coroner or medical examiner certifies the cause of death when a decedent dies
as a result of criminal or other violent means, while an attending physician certifies the cause of
death in all other circumstances.
       Second, it authorizes the physician who last examined or treated a decedent to certify the
decedent’s cause of death and complete and sign the medical certificate of death, but only in the
case of a decedent who did not have an attending physician (defined under continuing law to
mean the physician in charge of a patient’s care for the illness or condition that resulted in the
patient’s death).
      Third, the act extends the prior law timeline by which a medical certificate of death must
be completed and signed, from 48 hours after death to 48 hours after notice of the death.
        Fourth, it revises the law that applies when a decedent’s cause of death remains pending
as follows:
    ▪ By eliminating the authority of a coroner or medical examiner, when specifying on the
        medical certificate that the cause of death is pending, to sign the certificate by stamping
        it with a stamp of the coroner’s or examiner’s signature;
    ▪ By maintaining the authority of a coroner or medical examiner to sign a medical certificate
        that specifies the cause of death as pending, while also eliminating references to signing
        the certificate in the coroner’s or examiner’s own hand;
    ▪ By maintaining provisions authorizing the coroner or medical examiner to sign any other
        medical certificate of death or supplementary medical certification, but eliminating the
        requirement that the signing be done in the coroner’s or examiner’s own hand;

P a g e | 280                                                                                 H.B. 96
                                                                                        Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                LSC                            Legislative Budget Office



    ▪ By requiring any other medical certificate of death or supplementary medical certification
        to be signed by the coroner or medical examiner within 48 hours after determining the
        cause of death.
       Fifth, the act establishes the failure to comply with the law governing medical certificates
of death as a ground upon which the Medical Board may take disciplinary action against a
physician.
       Finally, the act grants a coroner, medical examiner, or physician acting in good faith and
upon reasonable belief immunity from civil liability and professional discipline for any act or
omission in certifying the cause of death or in completing and signing the medical certificate of
death.
340B covered entity reporting requirements (PARTIALLY
VETOED)
(R.C. 3701.88)
        The act imposes a new reporting requirement on 340B “covered entities,” which are
entities that participate in the federal 340B Drug Pricing Program. The reporting requirements
apply to all 340B covered entities enumerated under federal law.72
  Report contents (PARTIALLY VETOED)
       By July 1, 2026, and each July 1 annually thereafter, each 340B covered entity must submit
a report to ODH. The Governor vetoed a requirement that each offsite facility associated with
the 340B covered entity also comply with these new reporting requirements.
        The report must contain information from the previous calendar year as follows:
       1. For the covered entity and each pharmacy it contracts with to provide 340B drugs to
patients on behalf of the covered entity pursuant to the 340B Program (contract pharmacy), the
following data delineated by payor type (private insurance, Medicare, Medicaid, other coverage,
uninsured, self-pay):
        a. The aggregate acquisition costs for all 340B drugs dispensed or administered;
       b. The aggregate payments received from third-party payors, including insurers, for all
340B drugs dispensed or administered;
      c. The total number of prescriptions dispensed or administered, and the percentage that
were 340B drugs.
        2. The total payments made by the covered entity to contract pharmacies, third-party
administrators, or any other entity, in administering and providing services under the 340B Drug
Pricing Program.
        3. Information regarding the covered entity’s contract pharmacies, including:



72 42 U.S.C. 256(b).



P a g e | 281                                                                                 H.B. 96
                                                                                        Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                 LSC                           Legislative Budget Office



        a. Its total number of contract pharmacies;
        b. The total number of prescriptions that were filled at a contract pharmacy.
        4. A detailed accounting of the covered entity’s expenditures from 340B Drug Pricing
Program profits, including all programs, services, and equipment funded or purchased with those
profits. The Governor vetoed language that would have required the detailed accounting to be
itemized.
        The Governor also vetoed a requirement that the following also be included in the report:
        1. The percentage of patients served on a sliding fee scale for 340B drugs.
        2. The total operating cost of the covered entity, including an itemized cost report of:
       a. Implementing a direct pass-through of 340B profits to patients in the form of lower
cost-sharing for 340B drugs;
      b. Implementing a sliding fee scale for 340B drugs for low-income patients who have
household incomes under 200% of federal poverty guidelines;
       c. The covered entity’s charity care costs (costs for free or discounted items and services
provided to individuals meeting its financial assistance criteria and unable to pay, as reported in
its Medicare cost report).
       3. The number of the covered entity’s contract pharmacies located outside Ohio and the
state where they are located.
         4. Of the covered entity’s total number of prescriptions filled at a contracted pharmacy,
(1) the percentage that are contract pharmacies located outside Ohio and the percentage of all
of its prescriptions that were filled by a contract pharmacy and (2) the total reimbursement paid
for any 340B drugs dispensed or administered on behalf of the covered entity, and the
percentage change in that amount from the previous year.
  Form and manner of reports
       340B covered entities must submit the report in the form and manner specified by ODH,
in consultation with any other state agency ODH deems appropriate. ODH must then post the
submitted reports on its public website.
Lead abatement tax credit
(R.C. 3742.50)
        The act increases (from $10,000 to $40,000) the maximum amount of a lead abatement
tax credit certification that may be issued by the ODH Director. It also reduces from $5 million to
$3 million the total amount of lead abatement tax credit certificates that the Director may issue
in any fiscal year.




P a g e | 282                                                                                 H.B. 96
                                                                                        Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                 LSC                           Legislative Budget Office



Household sewage treatment systems (PARTIALLY VETOED)
  Evaluating sewage treatment system compliance (PARTIALLY
  VETOED)
  (R.C. 3718.02 and 3718.04; Section 737.30)
        The Governor vetoed provisions that would have required the ODH Director to adopt
rules establishing statistical methods for evaluating sewage treatment system (STS) compliance
for a 12-inch soil depth credit relative to bacterial parameters that are derived from a minimum
of 144 consecutive data points. Those statistical methods would have had to include one of the
following:
       1. The upper confidence limit of the mean method using log-transformed data, with the
upper confidence limit derived from one of the following:
        a. A two-sided 95% confidence interval for the mean and the maximum number of
individual data points exceeding the treatment standard being 5%; or
        b. A two-sided 99% confidence interval for the mean and the maximum number of
individual data points exceeding the treatment standard being 10%.
        2. Any other statistical method that is equally protective of public health and welfare.
       The ODH Director would have had to ensure that the rule specified that a soil depth credit
be approved when the upper confidence limit of the mean using log-transformed data was less
than the fecal coliform or E. coli. treatment standard set forth in the rules.
         Furthermore, the Governor partially vetoed provisions that would have prohibited the
ODH Director from implementing or enforcing any special device approval or similar policy
imposing additional requirements or restrictions on an STS or components of an STS that
combines the treatment of effluent with subsurface dispersal of treated effluent directly to the
soil, sand bed, or gravel for any approval in effect as of December 31, 2020. If the Director issued
an approval for such an STS and the approval was in effect as of December 31, 2020, the STS
could have been modified upon request by the manufacturer if the STS met the intent of
standards, guidelines, and protocols. However, the STS’s approval otherwise would have
remained valid under the original terms and conditions and could not have been revoked or
subjected to any new application or monitoring requirements unless clear, independent
statistically significant evidence demonstrated that the STS design consistently underperformed
relative to gravel distribution trenches.
       However, the Governor’s partial veto results in a specific authorization for the ODH
Director to implement or enforce any special device approval or similar policy imposing
additional requirements or restrictions on an STS or component of an STS that combines the
treatment of effluent with subsurface dispersal of treated effluent directly to the soil, sand bed,
or gravel. Furthermore, as a result of the partial veto, if the Director issued an approval for such
an STS and the approval was in effect as of December 31, 2020, the STS’s approval remains valid
under the original terms and conditions and may not be revoked unless evidence demonstrates
that the STS design consistently underperforms. This provision does not apply to effluent
discharged into waters of the state.

P a g e | 283                                                                                 H.B. 96
                                                                                        Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                 LSC                            Legislative Budget Office



  Household sewage treatment system – soil and slope inspection
  (VETOED)
  (R.C. 3718.02)
       The Governor vetoed a provision that would have prohibited the ODH Director from
adopting rules requiring a soil evaluator or soil scientist to evaluate the soil type and slope with
respect to a sewage treatment system or a proposed sewage treatment system. A sewage
treatment system is a household sewage system, a small flow on-site sewage treatment system,
or both. A “household sewage treatment system” is any sewage treatment system, or part of
such a system, that receives sewage from a single-family, two-family, or three-family dwelling.73
       Current rules adopted by the Director require a soil scientist or soil classifier certified by
the Soil Science Society of America to complete a soil evaluation for a sewage treatment
system.74




73 R.C. 3718.01, not in the act.

74 O.A.C. 3701-29-07.



P a g e | 284                                                                                  H.B. 96
                                                                                         Final Analysis
Office of Research and Drafting                  LSC                            Legislative Budget Office