(134th General Assembly)
                                    (Substitute House Bill Number 583)




                                        AN ACT
       To amend sections 3301.0714, 3307.01, 3309.01, 3310.032, 3310.70, 3313.976,
          3314.016, 3314.021, 3314.074, 3317.011, 3317.014, 3317.016, 3317.017,
          3317.019, 3317.0110, 3317.02, 3317.024, 3317.0212, 3317.0215, 3317.051,
          3317.064, 3317.25, 3319.077, 3319.078, 3323.25, 3323.251, 3326.39, 4723.07,
          and 5747.057 and to enact sections 5.2318, 3301.136, 3301.28, 3319.263, and
          4723.072 of the Revised Code and to amend Sections 265.150, 265.210, 265.225,
          and 265.335 of H.B. 110 of the 134th General Assembly, Section 4 of S.B. 1 of
          the 134th General Assembly, and Section 5 of H.B. 123 of the 133rd General
          Assembly as subsequently amended regarding substitute teachers, the school
          financing system, the Educational Choice Scholarship Program, the Pilot Project
          Scholarship Program, the ACE Educational Savings Account Program,
          Community Schools of Quality, community school sponsors, state funding for
          certain community schools, dyslexia screening requirements, tutoring programs,
          alternative resident education licenses, Ohio School Safety Month, the career-
          technical education income tax credit, practical nurse education programs, and to
          make an appropriation.

Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of Ohio:


        SECTION 1. That sections 3301.0714, 3307.01, 3309.01, 3310.032, 3310.70, 3313.976,
3314.016, 3314.021, 3314.074, 3317.011, 3317.014, 3317.016, 3317.017, 3317.019, 3317.0110,
3317.02, 3317.024, 3317.0212, 3317.0215, 3317.051, 3317.064, 3317.25, 3319.077, 3319.078,
3323.25, 3323.251, 3326.39, 4723.07, and 5747.057 be amended and sections 5.2318, 3301.136,
3301.28, 3319.263, and 4723.072 of the Revised Code be enacted to read as follows:
        Sec. 5.2318. The month of October shall be designated as "Ohio School Safety Month" to
increase public awareness of school safety programs and to encourage Ohioans to identify their role
in keeping Ohio schools a safe place for students to learn and grow.
        Sec. 3301.0714. (A) The state board of education shall adopt rules for a statewide education
management information system. The rules shall require the state board to establish guidelines for the
establishment and maintenance of the system in accordance with this section and the rules adopted
under this section. The guidelines shall include:
        (1) Standards identifying and defining the types of data in the system in accordance with
divisions (B) and (C) of this section;
        (2) Procedures for annually collecting and reporting the data to the state board in accordance
with division (D) of this section;
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                              134th G.A.
                                                     2
           (3) Procedures for annually compiling the data in accordance with division (G) of this
section;
         (4) Procedures for annually reporting the data to the public in accordance with division (H) of
this section;
         (5) Standards to provide strict safeguards to protect the confidentiality of personally
identifiable student data.
         (B) The guidelines adopted under this section shall require the data maintained in the
education management information system to include at least the following:
         (1) Student participation and performance data, for each grade in each school district as a
whole and for each grade in each school building in each school district, that includes:
         (a) The numbers of students receiving each category of instructional service offered by the
school district, such as regular education instruction, vocational education instruction, specialized
instruction programs or enrichment instruction that is part of the educational curriculum, instruction
for gifted students, instruction for students with disabilities, and remedial instruction. The guidelines
shall require instructional services under this division to be divided into discrete categories if an
instructional service is limited to a specific subject, a specific type of student, or both, such as regular
instructional services in mathematics, remedial reading instructional services, instructional services
specifically for students gifted in mathematics or some other subject area, or instructional services for
students with a specific type of disability. The categories of instructional services required by the
guidelines under this division shall be the same as the categories of instructional services used in
determining cost units pursuant to division (C)(3) of this section.
         (b) The numbers of students receiving support or extracurricular services for each of the
support services or extracurricular programs offered by the school district, such as counseling
services, health services, and extracurricular sports and fine arts programs. The categories of services
required by the guidelines under this division shall be the same as the categories of services used in
determining cost units pursuant to division (C)(4)(a) of this section.
         (c) Average student grades in each subject in grades nine through twelve;
         (d) Academic achievement levels as assessed under sections 3301.0710, 3301.0711, and
3301.0712 of the Revised Code;
         (e) The number of students designated as having a disabling condition pursuant to division
(C)(1) of section 3301.0711 of the Revised Code;
         (f) The numbers of students reported to the state board pursuant to division (C)(2) of section
3301.0711 of the Revised Code;
         (g) Attendance rates and the average daily attendance for the year. For purposes of this
division, a student shall be counted as present for any field trip that is approved by the school
administration.
         (h) Expulsion rates;
         (i) Suspension rates;
         (j) Dropout rates;
         (k) Rates of retention in grade;
         (l) For pupils in grades nine through twelve, the average number of carnegie units, as
calculated in accordance with state board of education rules;
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                           134th G.A.
                                                   3
         (m) Graduation rates, to be calculated in a manner specified by the department of education
that reflects the rate at which students who were in the ninth grade three years prior to the current
year complete school and that is consistent with nationally accepted reporting requirements;
         (n) Results of diagnostic assessments administered to kindergarten students as required under
section 3301.0715 of the Revised Code to permit a comparison of the academic readiness of
kindergarten students. However, no district shall be required to report to the department the results of
any diagnostic assessment administered to a kindergarten student, except for the language and
reading assessment described in division (A)(2) of section 3301.0715 of the Revised Code, if the
parent of that student requests the district not to report those results.
         (o) Beginning on July 1, 2018, for each disciplinary action which is required to be reported
under division (B)(8) (B)(4) of this section, districts and schools also shall include an identification
of the person or persons, if any, at whom the student's violent behavior that resulted in discipline was
directed. The person or persons shall be identified by the respective classification at the district or
school, such as student, teacher, or nonteaching employee, but shall not be identified by name.
         Division (B)(1)(o) of this section does not apply after the date that is two years following the
submission of the report required by Section 733.13 of H.B. 49 of the 132nd general assembly.
         (p) The number of students earning each state diploma seal included in the system prescribed
under division (A) of section 3313.6114 of the Revised Code;
         (q) The number of students demonstrating competency for graduation using each option
described in divisions (B)(1)(a) to (d) of section 3313.618 of the Revised Code;
         (r) The number of students completing each foundational and supporting option as part of the
demonstration of competency for graduation pursuant to division (B)(1)(b) of section 3313.618 of the
Revised Code;
         (s) The number of students enrolled in all-day kindergarten, as defined in section 3321.05 of
the Revised Code.
         (2) Personnel and classroom enrollment data for each school district, including:
         (a) The total numbers of licensed employees and nonlicensed employees and the numbers of
full-time equivalent licensed employees and nonlicensed employees providing each category of
instructional service, instructional support service, and administrative support service used pursuant
to division (C)(3) of this section. The guidelines adopted under this section shall require these
categories of data to be maintained for the school district as a whole and, wherever applicable, for
each grade in the school district as a whole, for each school building as a whole, and for each grade
in each school building.
         (b) The total number of employees and the number of full-time equivalent employees
providing each category of service used pursuant to divisions (C)(4)(a) and (b) of this section, and
the total numbers of licensed employees and nonlicensed employees and the numbers of full-time
equivalent licensed employees and nonlicensed employees providing each category used pursuant to
division (C)(4)(c) of this section. The guidelines adopted under this section shall require these
categories of data to be maintained for the school district as a whole and, wherever applicable, for
each grade in the school district as a whole, for each school building as a whole, and for each grade
in each school building.
         (c) The total number of regular classroom teachers teaching classes of regular education and
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                           134th G.A.
                                                   4
the average number of pupils enrolled in each such class, in each of grades kindergarten through five
in the district as a whole and in each school building in the school district.
         (d) The number of lead teachers employed by each school district and each school building.
         (3)(a) Student demographic data for each school district, including information regarding the
gender ratio of the school district's pupils, the racial make-up of the school district's pupils, the
number of English learners in the district, and an appropriate measure of the number of the school
district's pupils who reside in economically disadvantaged households. The demographic data shall
be collected in a manner to allow correlation with data collected under division (B)(1) of this section.
Categories for data collected pursuant to division (B)(3) of this section shall conform, where
appropriate, to standard practices of agencies of the federal government.
         (b) With respect to each student entering kindergarten, whether the student previously
participated in a public preschool program, a private preschool program, or a head start program, and
the number of years the student participated in each of these programs.
         (4) For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, the annual reports submitted by each school district under
section 3317.25 of the Revised Code describing the initiative or initiatives on which the district's
disadvantaged pupil impact aid were spent;
         (5) For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, the average number of students riding on school buses
routed to community schools established under Chapter 3314. of the Revised Code in accordance
with section 3327.01 of the Revised Code;
         (6) For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, the average number of students riding on school buses
routed to STEM schools established under Chapter 3326. of the Revised Code in accordance with
section 3327.01 of the Revised Code;
          (7) For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, the average number of students riding on school buses
routed to nonpublic schools in accordance with section 3327.01 of the Revised Code;
         (8) Any data required to be collected pursuant to federal law.
         (C) The education management information system shall include cost accounting data for
each district as a whole and for each school building in each school district. The guidelines adopted
under this section shall require the cost data for each school district to be maintained in a system of
mutually exclusive cost units and shall require all of the costs of each school district to be divided
among the cost units. The guidelines shall require the system of mutually exclusive cost units to
include at least the following:
         (1) Administrative costs for the school district as a whole. The guidelines shall require the
cost units under this division (C)(1) to be designed so that each of them may be compiled and
reported in terms of average expenditure per pupil in enrolled ADM in the school district, as
determined pursuant to section 3317.03 of the Revised Code.
         (2) Administrative costs for each school building in the school district. The guidelines shall
require the cost units under this division (C)(2) to be designed so that each of them may be compiled
and reported in terms of average expenditure per full-time equivalent pupil receiving instructional or
support services in each building.
         (3) Instructional services costs for each category of instructional service provided directly to
students and required by guidelines adopted pursuant to division (B)(1)(a) of this section. The
guidelines shall require the cost units under division (C)(3) of this section to be designed so that each
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                           134th G.A.
                                                   5
of them may be compiled and reported in terms of average expenditure per pupil receiving the
service in the school district as a whole and average expenditure per pupil receiving the service in
each building in the school district and in terms of a total cost for each category of service and, as a
breakdown of the total cost, a cost for each of the following components:
        (a) The cost of each instructional services category required by guidelines adopted under
division (B)(1)(a) of this section that is provided directly to students by a classroom teacher;
        (b) The cost of the instructional support services, such as services provided by a speech-
language pathologist, classroom aide, multimedia aide, or librarian, provided directly to students in
conjunction with each instructional services category;
        (c) The cost of the administrative support services related to each instructional services
category, such as the cost of personnel that develop the curriculum for the instructional services
category and the cost of personnel supervising or coordinating the delivery of the instructional
services category.
        (4) Support or extracurricular services costs for each category of service directly provided to
students and required by guidelines adopted pursuant to division (B)(1)(b) of this section. The
guidelines shall require the cost units under division (C)(4) of this section to be designed so that each
of them may be compiled and reported in terms of average expenditure per pupil receiving the
service in the school district as a whole and average expenditure per pupil receiving the service in
each building in the school district and in terms of a total cost for each category of service and, as a
breakdown of the total cost, a cost for each of the following components:
        (a) The cost of each support or extracurricular services category required by guidelines
adopted under division (B)(1)(b) of this section that is provided directly to students by a licensed
employee, such as services provided by a guidance counselor or any services provided by a licensed
employee under a supplemental contract;
        (b) The cost of each such services category provided directly to students by a nonlicensed
employee, such as janitorial services, cafeteria services, or services of a sports trainer;
        (c) The cost of the administrative services related to each services category in division (C)(4)
(a) or (b) of this section, such as the cost of any licensed or nonlicensed employees that develop,
supervise, coordinate, or otherwise are involved in administering or aiding the delivery of each
services category.
        (D)(1) The guidelines adopted under this section shall require school districts to collect
information about individual students, staff members, or both in connection with any data required by
division (B) or (C) of this section or other reporting requirements established in the Revised Code.
The guidelines may also require school districts to report information about individual staff members
in connection with any data required by division (B) or (C) of this section or other reporting
requirements established in the Revised Code. The guidelines shall not authorize school districts to
request social security numbers of individual students. The guidelines shall prohibit the reporting
under this section of a student's name, address, and social security number to the state board of
education or the department of education. The guidelines shall also prohibit the reporting under this
section of any personally identifiable information about any student, except for the purpose of
assigning the data verification code required by division (D)(2) of this section, to any other person
unless such person is employed by the school district or the information technology center operated
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                            134th G.A.
                                                    6
under section 3301.075 of the Revised Code and is authorized by the district or technology center to
have access to such information or is employed by an entity with which the department contracts for
the scoring or the development of state assessments. The guidelines may require school districts to
provide the social security numbers of individual staff members and the county of residence for a
student. Nothing in this section prohibits the state board of education or department of education
from providing a student's county of residence to the department of taxation to facilitate the
distribution of tax revenue.
         (2)(a) The guidelines shall provide for each school district or community school to assign a
data verification code that is unique on a statewide basis over time to each student whose initial Ohio
enrollment is in that district or school and to report all required individual student data for that
student utilizing such code. The guidelines shall also provide for assigning data verification codes to
all students enrolled in districts or community schools on the effective date of the guidelines
established under this section. The assignment of data verification codes for other entities, as
described in division (D)(2)(d) of this section, the use of those codes, and the reporting and use of
associated individual student data shall be coordinated by the department in accordance with state
and federal law.
           School districts shall report individual student data to the department through the
information technology centers utilizing the code. The entities described in division (D)(2)(d) of this
section shall report individual student data to the department in the manner prescribed by the
department.
         (b)(i) Except as provided in sections 3301.941, 3310.11, 3310.42, 3310.63, 3313.978, and
3317.20, and 5747.057 of the Revised Code, and in division (D)(2)(b)(ii) of this section, at no time
shall the state board or the department have access to information that would enable any data
verification code to be matched to personally identifiable student data.
         (ii) For the purpose of making per-pupil payments to community schools under section
3317.022 of the Revised Code, the department shall have access to information that would enable
any data verification code to be matched to personally identifiable student data.
         (c) Each school district and community school shall ensure that the data verification code is
included in the student's records reported to any subsequent school district, community school, or
state institution of higher education, as defined in section 3345.011 of the Revised Code, in which the
student enrolls. Any such subsequent district or school shall utilize the same identifier in its reporting
of data under this section.
         (d) The director of any state agency that administers a publicly funded program providing
services to children who are younger than compulsory school age, as defined in section 3321.01 of
the Revised Code, including the directors of health, job and family services, mental health and
addiction services, and developmental disabilities, shall request and receive, pursuant to sections
3301.0723 and 5123.0423 of the Revised Code, a data verification code for a child who is receiving
those services.
         (E) The guidelines adopted under this section may require school districts to collect and
report data, information, or reports other than that described in divisions (A), (B), and (C) of this
section for the purpose of complying with other reporting requirements established in the Revised
Code. The other data, information, or reports may be maintained in the education management
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                           134th G.A.
                                                   7
information system but are not required to be compiled as part of the profile formats required under
division (G) of this section or the annual statewide report required under division (H) of this section.
         (F) Beginning with the school year that begins July 1, 1991, the board of education of each
school district shall annually collect and report to the state board, in accordance with the guidelines
established by the board, the data required pursuant to this section. A school district may collect and
report these data notwithstanding section 2151.357 or 3319.321 of the Revised Code.
         (G) The state board shall, in accordance with the procedures it adopts, annually compile the
data reported by each school district pursuant to division (D) of this section. The state board shall
design formats for profiling each school district as a whole and each school building within each
district and shall compile the data in accordance with these formats. These profile formats shall:
         (1) Include all of the data gathered under this section in a manner that facilitates comparison
among school districts and among school buildings within each school district;
         (2) Present the data on academic achievement levels as assessed by the testing of student
achievement maintained pursuant to division (B)(1)(d) of this section.
         (H)(1) The state board shall, in accordance with the procedures it adopts, annually prepare a
statewide report for all school districts and the general public that includes the profile of each of the
school districts developed pursuant to division (G) of this section. Copies of the report shall be sent
to each school district.
         (2) The state board shall, in accordance with the procedures it adopts, annually prepare an
individual report for each school district and the general public that includes the profiles of each of
the school buildings in that school district developed pursuant to division (G) of this section. Copies
of the report shall be sent to the superintendent of the district and to each member of the district
board of education.
         (3) Copies of the reports received from the state board under divisions (H)(1) and (2) of this
section shall be made available to the general public at each school district's offices. Each district
board of education shall make copies of each report available to any person upon request and
payment of a reasonable fee for the cost of reproducing the report. The board shall annually publish
in a newspaper of general circulation in the school district, at least twice during the two weeks prior
to the week in which the reports will first be available, a notice containing the address where the
reports are available and the date on which the reports will be available.
         (I) Any data that is collected or maintained pursuant to this section and that identifies an
individual pupil is not a public record for the purposes of section 149.43 of the Revised Code.
         (J) As used in this section:
         (1) "School district" means any city, local, exempted village, or joint vocational school
district and, in accordance with section 3314.17 of the Revised Code, any community school. As
used in division (L) of this section, "school district" also includes any educational service center or
other educational entity required to submit data using the system established under this section.
         (2) "Cost" means any expenditure for operating expenses made by a school district excluding
any expenditures for debt retirement except for payments made to any commercial lending institution
for any loan approved pursuant to section 3313.483 of the Revised Code.
         (K) Any person who removes data from the information system established under this section
for the purpose of releasing it to any person not entitled under law to have access to such information
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                            134th G.A.
                                                    8
is subject to section 2913.42 of the Revised Code prohibiting tampering with data.
         (L)(1) In accordance with division (L)(2) of this section and the rules adopted under division
(L)(10) of this section, the department of education may sanction any school district that reports
incomplete or inaccurate data, reports data that does not conform to data requirements and
descriptions published by the department, fails to report data in a timely manner, or otherwise does
not make a good faith effort to report data as required by this section.
         (2) If the department decides to sanction a school district under this division, the department
shall take the following sequential actions:
         (a) Notify the district in writing that the department has determined that data has not been
reported as required under this section and require the district to review its data submission and
submit corrected data by a deadline established by the department. The department also may require
the district to develop a corrective action plan, which shall include provisions for the district to
provide mandatory staff training on data reporting procedures.
         (b) Withhold up to ten per cent of the total amount of state funds due to the district for the
current fiscal year and, if not previously required under division (L)(2)(a) of this section, require the
district to develop a corrective action plan in accordance with that division;
         (c) Withhold an additional amount of up to twenty per cent of the total amount of state funds
due to the district for the current fiscal year;
         (d) Direct department staff or an outside entity to investigate the district's data reporting
practices and make recommendations for subsequent actions. The recommendations may include one
or more of the following actions:
         (i) Arrange for an audit of the district's data reporting practices by department staff or an
outside entity;
         (ii) Conduct a site visit and evaluation of the district;
         (iii) Withhold an additional amount of up to thirty per cent of the total amount of state funds
due to the district for the current fiscal year;
         (iv) Continue monitoring the district's data reporting;
         (v) Assign department staff to supervise the district's data management system;
         (vi) Conduct an investigation to determine whether to suspend or revoke the license of any
district employee in accordance with division (N) of this section;
         (vii) If the district is issued a report card under section 3302.03 of the Revised Code, indicate
on the report card that the district has been sanctioned for failing to report data as required by this
section;
         (viii) If the district is issued a report card under section 3302.03 of the Revised Code and
incomplete or inaccurate data submitted by the district likely caused the district to receive a higher
performance rating than it deserved under that section, issue a revised report card for the district;
         (ix) Any other action designed to correct the district's data reporting problems.
         (3) Any time the department takes an action against a school district under division (L)(2) of
this section, the department shall make a report of the circumstances that prompted the action. The
department shall send a copy of the report to the district superintendent or chief administrator and
maintain a copy of the report in its files.
         (4) If any action taken under division (L)(2) of this section resolves a school district's data
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                              134th G.A.
                                                     9
reporting problems to the department's satisfaction, the department shall not take any further actions
described by that division. If the department withheld funds from the district under that division, the
department may release those funds to the district, except that if the department withheld funding
under division (L)(2)(c) of this section, the department shall not release the funds withheld under
division (L)(2)(b) of this section and, if the department withheld funding under division (L)(2)(d) of
this section, the department shall not release the funds withheld under division (L)(2)(b) or (c) of this
section.
         (5) Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, the department may use its own
staff or an outside entity to conduct an audit of a school district's data reporting practices any time the
department has reason to believe the district has not made a good faith effort to report data as
required by this section. If any audit conducted by an outside entity under division (L)(2)(d)(i) or (5)
of this section confirms that a district has not made a good faith effort to report data as required by
this section, the district shall reimburse the department for the full cost of the audit. The department
may withhold state funds due to the district for this purpose.
         (6) Prior to issuing a revised report card for a school district under division (L)(2)(d)(viii) of
this section, the department may hold a hearing to provide the district with an opportunity to
demonstrate that it made a good faith effort to report data as required by this section. The hearing
shall be conducted by a referee appointed by the department. Based on the information provided in
the hearing, the referee shall recommend whether the department should issue a revised report card
for the district. If the referee affirms the department's contention that the district did not make a good
faith effort to report data as required by this section, the district shall bear the full cost of conducting
the hearing and of issuing any revised report card.
         (7) If the department determines that any inaccurate data reported under this section caused a
school district to receive excess state funds in any fiscal year, the district shall reimburse the
department an amount equal to the excess funds, in accordance with a payment schedule determined
by the department. The department may withhold state funds due to the district for this purpose.
         (8) Any school district that has funds withheld under division (L)(2) of this section may
appeal the withholding in accordance with Chapter 119. of the Revised Code.
         (9) In all cases of a disagreement between the department and a school district regarding the
appropriateness of an action taken under division (L)(2) of this section, the burden of proof shall be
on the district to demonstrate that it made a good faith effort to report data as required by this section.
         (10) The state board of education shall adopt rules under Chapter 119. of the Revised Code to
implement division (L) of this section.
         (M) No information technology center or school district shall acquire, change, or update its
student administration software package to manage and report data required to be reported to the
department unless it converts to a student software package that is certified by the department.
         (N) The state board of education, in accordance with sections 3319.31 and 3319.311 of the
Revised Code, may suspend or revoke a license as defined under division (A) of section 3319.31 of
the Revised Code that has been issued to any school district employee found to have willfully
reported erroneous, inaccurate, or incomplete data to the education management information system.
         (O) No person shall release or maintain any information about any student in violation of this
section. Whoever violates this division is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                          134th G.A.
                                                  10
        (P) The department shall disaggregate the data collected under division (B)(1)(n) of this
section according to the race and socioeconomic status of the students assessed.
        (Q) If the department cannot compile any of the information required by division (I) of
section 3302.03 of the Revised Code based upon the data collected under this section, the department
shall develop a plan and a reasonable timeline for the collection of any data necessary to comply with
that division.
        Sec. 3301.136. The department of education shall compile a list of tutoring programs that it
considers to be of high quality and have the potential to accelerate learning for students in the areas
of English language arts, mathematics, science, and social studies. For this purpose, the department
shall request the qualifications of public and private entities that provide tutoring programs for
students. The department shall establish a rubric to evaluate the programs and determine a minimum
score for a tutoring program to be included on the department's list.
        In compiling the list, the department may designate individual tutoring programs as more
appropriate for certain grade levels, populations of students, or subject areas.
        The department may establish multiple application periods in any school year for entities to
submit their qualifications for consideration to be included on the list. However, the department shall
post the initial list of tutoring programs on the department's web site not later than October 1, 2022.
No school district or school shall be required to use a tutoring program on the list.
        Sec. 3301.28. (A) As used in this section:
        (1) "Coordinating service center" means the educational service center of central Ohio or its
successor organization.
        (2) "Public school" means a school building operated by a school district or other public
school, as defined in section 3301.0711 of the Revised Code, or a building operated by an
educational service center.
        (B) The superintendent of public instruction shall establish a program to provide tutoring and
remedial education services in reading and English language arts, mathematics, science, and social
studies to students at public and chartered nonpublic schools that elect to participate in the program.
Tutors shall not be considered employees of the public or chartered nonpublic school in which they
provide tutoring services. Rather, the tutors shall be either employed or engaged as a volunteer by the
coordinating service center. The coordinating service center shall be responsible for compensating
each individual it employs as a tutor using funds transferred from the school at which the individual
works as a tutor. The coordinating service center may coordinate placement of tutors with the sixteen
regional educational service centers, selected under division (C)(4) of this section, and other service
centers as determined necessary by the coordinating service center.
        Individuals who wish to participate in the program as tutors shall submit an application to the
coordinating service center. Not later than sixty days after the effective date of this section, the
coordinating service center shall establish application procedures for individuals who wish to
participate in the program as tutors.
        To be eligible to participate as a tutor under the program, an individual shall be either of the
following:
        (1) A retired teacher or substitute teacher, regardless of whether the teacher holds a valid
educator license, certificate, or permit issued under Chapter 3319. or section 3301.071 of the Revised
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                            134th G.A.
                                                   11
Code, provided that the teacher has not had an educator license, certificate, or permit denied,
suspended, or revoked by the state board of education under section 3319.31 of the Revised Code or
entered into a consent agreement pursuant to division (E) of section 3319.311 of the Revised Code;
         (2) An individual, not described in division (A)(1) of this section, who is determined to be
eligible by the coordinating service center in accordance with standards established by the state
superintendent.
         (C) The state superintendent, with assistance from participating educational service centers,
and in consultation with public and chartered nonpublic schools, shall administer and implement the
program as follows:
         (1) Not later than sixty days after the effective date of this section, the state superintendent
shall establish standards for determining the eligibility of tutors under division (B)(2) of this section.
         (2) Not later than sixty days after the effective date of this section, the coordinating service
center, in consultation with the state superintendent, shall create a training course for tutors described
in division (B) of this section who do not hold valid educator licenses, certificates, or permits issued
under Chapter 3319. or section 3301.071 of the Revised Code. The coordinating service center and
state superintendent may establish additional training requirements for tutors who provide tutoring
services to students with special needs or students with an individualized education program, as that
term is defined in section 3323.01 of the Revised Code. In addition, the coordinating service center
and state superintendent may continue to provide training to tutors after their placement in schools.
         (3) The department of education shall serve as the fiscal agent for the program. The
department shall provide for administrative and implementation costs, costs of developing the
training course described in division (C)(2) of this section, and provide technical assistance at the
request of the coordinating service center.
         The department shall not compensate tutors under the program.
         The department shall not charge any registration fee to individuals who wish to participate in
the program as tutors.
         (4) Educational service centers from each educational regional service system described in
section 3312.02 of the Revised Code may select one educational service center to administer the
training program for their region in conjunction with the coordinating service center. The educational
service center selected for each region may cooperate with individual educational service centers to
implement the training program.
         (5) Each educational service center may coordinate the placement of tutors at the
participating public and chartered nonpublic schools within its service territory.
         (6) The coordinating service center shall require an individual employed or engaged as a
volunteer as a tutor under this section to apply for and receive a registration from the department.
         As a condition of registration under this section, an individual shall be subject to a criminal
records check as prescribed by section 3319.39 or 3319.391 of the Revised Code, as appropriate. The
individual shall request the criminal records check through the coordinating service center and shall
submit the criminal records check to the department of education in a manner determined by the
department. The department shall use the information submitted to enroll the individual in the
retained applicant fingerprint database, established under section 109.5721 of the Revised Code, in
the same manner as any teacher licensed under sections 3319.22 to 3319.31 of the Revised Code.
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                          134th G.A.
                                                  12
         If the department receives notification of the arrest or conviction of an individual registered
under division (C)(6) of this section, the department shall promptly notify the coordinating service
center and may take any action authorized under sections 3319.31 and 3319.311 of the Revised Code
that the department considers appropriate. The department shall not accept the application of any
individual under this section if the department learns that the individual has pleaded guilty to, has
been found guilty by a jury or court of, or has been convicted of any of the offenses listed in division
(C) of section 3319.31 of the Revised Code.
         The department shall reimburse the coordinating service center for both of the following:
         (a) Any costs incurred by the coordinating service center when assisting with the registration
of tutors with the department;
         (b) The cost of the criminal records check required under this section.
         (7) Participation by public and chartered nonpublic schools is voluntary. Public and chartered
nonpublic schools that wish to participate in the tutoring and remedial education program shall notify
the coordinating service center of their intention to do so.
         Each participating school shall have the ultimate authority over how best to incorporate tutors
into the school setting, but such determinations shall be made in cooperation with the educational
service center. Program activities may take place before, during, or after school as well as during
breaks from school such as weekends, holidays, or summer vacation. Program activities may take
place on an online platform or in person, including on school premises, at community-based youth
development organizations, or in another public location the school's governing body and educational
service center determine to be appropriate.
         A participating school shall provide necessary materials, space, and equipment for tutors
placed in the school. A participating school shall transfer funds to the coordinating service center to
assist the service center in making payments to tutors placed in the school and paying the cost of
other benefits for the tutors. The state superintendent, in consultation with the chancellor of higher
education, shall create a list of benefits which a participant may receive.
         Participating schools shall use their own funds to pay costs incurred from participating in the
program.
         (D) Upon the completion of each of the 2022-2023, 2023-2024, and 2024-2025 school years,
the department shall conduct a review of the program's effectiveness in providing tutoring and
remedial education to students. Based on each of those reviews, the department shall issue a report of
its findings. The report also shall include the number of participating public and chartered nonpublic
schools, tutors, and students, as well as whether tutoring in a particular school was provided on an
online platform or in-person. The department may request and collect data from public or chartered
nonpublic schools and from educational service centers for the report. The department shall, in
accordance with section 101.68 of the Revised Code, submit those reports to the general assembly, as
follows:
         (1) The report for the 2022-2023 school year shall be submitted not later than September 30,
2023.
         (2) The report for the 2023-2024 school year shall be submitted not later than September 30,
2024.
         (3) The report for the 2024-2025 school year shall be submitted not later than September 30,
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                         134th G.A.
                                                  13
2025.
         (E) Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting a public or chartered nonpublic
school from contracting or partnering with another entity to provide tutoring services to the school's
students.
         Sec. 3307.01. As used in this chapter:
         (A) "Employer" means the board of education, school district, governing authority of any
community school established under Chapter 3314. of the Revised Code, a science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics school established under Chapter 3326. of the Revised Code, college,
university, institution, or other agency within the state by which a teacher is employed and paid.
         (B)(1) "Teacher" means all of the following:
         (a) Any person paid from public funds and employed in the public schools of the state under
any type of contract described in section 3311.77 or 3319.08 of the Revised Code in a position for
which the person is required to have a license or registration issued pursuant to sections 3319.22 to
3319.31 of the Revised Code;
         (b) Except as provided in division (B)(2)(b) or (c) of this section, any person employed as a
teacher or faculty member in a community school or a science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics school pursuant to Chapter 3314. or 3326. of the Revised Code;
         (c) Any person having a license or registration issued pursuant to sections 3319.22 to 3319.31
of the Revised Code and employed in a public school in this state in an educational position, as
determined by the state board of education, under programs provided for by federal acts or
regulations and financed in whole or in part from federal funds, but for which no licensure
requirements for the position can be made under the provisions of such federal acts or regulations;
         (d) Any other teacher or faculty member employed in any school, college, university,
institution, or other agency wholly controlled and managed, and supported in whole or in part, by the
state or any political subdivision thereof, including Central state university, Cleveland state
university, and the university of Toledo;
         (e) The educational employees of the department of education, as determined by the state
superintendent of public instruction;
         (f) Any person having a registration issued pursuant to section 3301.28 of the Revised Code
and employed as a tutor by the coordinating service center as defined in that section.
         In all cases of doubt, the state teachers retirement board shall determine whether any person
is a teacher, and its decision shall be final.
         (2) "Teacher" does not include any of the following:
         (a) Any eligible employee of a public institution of higher education, as defined in section
3305.01 of the Revised Code, who elects to participate in an alternative retirement plan established
under Chapter 3305. of the Revised Code;
         (b) Any person employed by a community school operator, as defined in section 3314.02 of
the Revised Code, if on or before February 1, 2016, the school's operator was withholding and paying
employee and employer taxes pursuant to 26 U.S.C. 3101(a) and 3111(a) for persons employed in the
school as teachers, unless the person had contributing service in a community school in the state
within one year prior to the later of February 1, 2016, or the date on which the operator for the first
time withholds and pays employee and employer taxes pursuant to 26 U.S.C. 3101(a) and 3111(a) for
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                          134th G.A.
                                                  14
that person;
         (c) Any person who would otherwise be a teacher under division (B)(2)(b) of this section
who terminates employment with a community school operator and has no contributing service in a
community school in the state for a period of at least one year from the date of termination of
employment.
         (C) "Member" means any person included in the membership of the state teachers retirement
system, which shall consist of all teachers and contributors as defined in divisions (B) and (D) of this
section and all disability benefit recipients, as defined in section 3307.50 of the Revised Code.
However, for purposes of this chapter, the following persons shall not be considered members:
         (1) A student, intern, or resident who is not a member while employed part-time by a school,
college, or university at which the student, intern, or resident is regularly attending classes;
         (2) A person denied membership pursuant to section 3307.24 of the Revised Code;
         (3) An other system retirant, as defined in section 3307.35 of the Revised Code, or a
superannuate;
         (4) An individual employed in a program established pursuant to the "Job Training
Partnership Act," 96 Stat. 1322 (1982), 29 U.S.C.A. 1501;
         (5) The surviving spouse of a member or retirant if the surviving spouse's only connection to
the retirement system is an account in an STRS defined contribution plan.
         (D) "Contributor" means any person who has an account in the teachers' savings fund or
defined contribution fund, except that "contributor" does not mean a member or retirant's surviving
spouse with an account in an STRS defined contribution plan.
         (E) "Beneficiary" means any person eligible to receive, or in receipt of, a retirement
allowance or other benefit provided by this chapter.
         (F) "Year" means the year beginning the first day of July and ending with the thirtieth day of
June next following, except that for the purpose of determining final average salary under the plan
described in sections 3307.50 to 3307.79 of the Revised Code, "year" may mean the contract year.
         (G) "Local district pension system" means any school teachers pension fund created in any
school district of the state in accordance with the laws of the state prior to September 1, 1920.
         (H) "Employer contribution" means the amount paid by an employer, as determined by the
employer rate, including the normal and deficiency rates, contributions, and funds wherever used in
this chapter.
         (I) "Five years of service credit" means employment covered under this chapter and
employment covered under a former retirement plan operated, recognized, or endorsed by a college,
institute, university, or political subdivision of this state prior to coverage under this chapter.
         (J) "Actuary" means an actuarial professional contracted with or employed by the state
teachers retirement board, who shall be either of the following:
         (1) A member of the American academy of actuaries;
         (2) A firm, partnership, or corporation of which at least one person is a member of the
American academy of actuaries.
         (K) "Fiduciary" means a person who does any of the following:
         (1) Exercises any discretionary authority or control with respect to the management of the
system, or with respect to the management or disposition of its assets;
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                           134th G.A.
                                                   15
         (2) Renders investment advice for a fee, direct or indirect, with respect to money or property
of the system;
         (3) Has any discretionary authority or responsibility in the administration of the system.
         (L)(1)(a) Except as provided in this division, "compensation" means all salary, wages, and
other earnings paid to a teacher by reason of the teacher's employment, including compensation paid
pursuant to a supplemental contract. The salary, wages, and other earnings shall be determined prior
to determination of the amount required to be contributed to the teachers' savings fund or defined
contribution fund under section 3307.26 of the Revised Code and without regard to whether any of
the salary, wages, or other earnings are treated as deferred income for federal income tax purposes.
         (b) Except as provided in division (L)(1)(c) of this section, "compensation" includes amounts
paid by an employer as a retroactive payment of earnings, damages, or back pay pursuant to a court
order, court-adopted settlement agreement, or other settlement agreement if the retirement system
receives both of the following:
         (i) Teacher and employer contributions under sections 3307.26 and 3307.28 of the Revised
Code, plus interest compounded annually at a rate determined by the state teachers retirement board,
for each year or portion of a year for which amounts are paid under the order or agreement;
         (ii) Teacher and employer contributions under sections 3307.26 and 3307.28 of the Revised
Code, plus interest compounded annually at a rate determined by the board, for each year or portion
of a year not subject to division (L)(1)(b)(i) of this section for which the board determines the teacher
was improperly paid, regardless of the teacher's ability to recover on such amounts improperly paid.
         (c) If any portion of an amount paid by an employer as a retroactive payment of earnings,
damages, or back pay is for an amount, benefit, or payment described in division (L)(2) of this
section, that portion of the amount is not compensation under this section.
         (2) Compensation does not include any of the following:
         (a) Payments for accrued but unused sick leave or personal leave, including payments made
under a plan established pursuant to section 124.39 of the Revised Code or any other plan established
by the employer;
         (b) Payments made for accrued but unused vacation leave, including payments made pursuant
to section 124.13 of the Revised Code or a plan established by the employer;
         (c) Payments made for vacation pay covering concurrent periods for which other salary,
compensation, or benefits under this chapter or Chapter 145. or 3309. of the Revised Code are paid;
         (d) Amounts paid by the employer to provide life insurance, sickness, accident, endowment,
health, medical, hospital, dental, or surgical coverage, or other insurance for the teacher or the
teacher's family, or amounts paid by the employer to the teacher in lieu of providing the insurance;
         (e) Incidental benefits, including lodging, food, laundry, parking, or services furnished by the
employer, use of the employer's property or equipment, and reimbursement for job-related expenses
authorized by the employer, including moving and travel expenses and expenses related to
professional development;
         (f) Payments made by the employer in exchange for a member's waiver of a right to receive
any payment, amount, or benefit described in division (L)(2) of this section;
         (g) Payments by the employer for services not actually rendered;
         (h) Any amount paid by the employer as a retroactive increase in salary, wages, or other
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                          134th G.A.
                                                  16
earnings, unless the increase is one of the following:
         (i) A retroactive increase paid to a member employed by a school district board of education
in a position that requires a license designated for teaching and not designated for being an
administrator issued under section 3319.22 of the Revised Code that is paid in accordance with
uniform criteria applicable to all members employed by the board in positions requiring the licenses;
         (ii) A retroactive increase paid to a member employed by a school district board of education
in a position that requires a license designated for being an administrator issued under section
3319.22 of the Revised Code that is paid in accordance with uniform criteria applicable to all
members employed by the board in positions requiring the licenses;
         (iii) A retroactive increase paid to a member employed by a school district board of education
as a superintendent that is also paid as described in division (L)(2)(h)(i) of this section;
         (iv) A retroactive increase paid to a member employed by an employer other than a school
district board of education in accordance with uniform criteria applicable to all members employed
by the employer.
         (i) Payments made to or on behalf of a teacher that are in excess of the annual compensation
that may be taken into account by the retirement system under division (a)(17) of section 401 of the
"Internal Revenue Code of 1986," 100 Stat. 2085, 26 U.S.C.A. 401(a)(17), as amended. For a teacher
who first establishes membership before July 1, 1996, the annual compensation that may be taken
into account by the retirement system shall be determined under division (d)(3) of section 13212 of
the "Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993," Pub. L. No. 103-66, 107 Stat. 472.
         (j) Payments made under division (B), (C), or (E) of section 5923.05 of the Revised Code,
Section 4 of Substitute Senate Bill No. 3 of the 119th general assembly, Section 3 of Amended
Substitute Senate Bill No. 164 of the 124th general assembly, or Amended Substitute House Bill No.
405 of the 124th general assembly;
         (k) Anything of value received by the teacher that is based on or attributable to retirement or
an agreement to retire.
         (3) The retirement board shall determine both of the following:
         (a) Whether particular forms of earnings are included in any of the categories enumerated in
this division;
         (b) Whether any form of earnings not enumerated in this division is to be included in
compensation.
         Decisions of the board made under this division shall be final.
         (M) "Superannuate" means both of the following:
         (1) A former teacher receiving from the system a retirement allowance under section 3307.58
or 3307.59 of the Revised Code;
         (2) A former teacher receiving a benefit from the system under a plan established under
section 3307.81 of the Revised Code, except that "superannuate" does not include a former teacher
who is receiving a benefit based on disability under a plan established under section 3307.81 of the
Revised Code.
         For purposes of sections 3307.35 and 3307.353 of the Revised Code, "superannuate" also
means a former teacher receiving from the system a combined service retirement benefit paid in
accordance with section 3307.57 of the Revised Code, regardless of which retirement system is
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                          134th G.A.
                                                  17
paying the benefit.
         (N) "STRS defined benefit plan" means the plan described in sections 3307.50 to 3307.79 of
the Revised Code.
         (O) "STRS defined contribution plan" means the plans established under section 3307.81 of
the Revised Code and includes the STRS combined plan under that section.
         (P) "Faculty" means the teaching staff of a university, college, or school, including any
academic administrators.
         Sec. 3309.01. As used in this chapter:
         (A) "Employer" or "public employer" means boards of education, school districts, joint
vocational districts, governing authorities of community schools established under Chapter 3314. of
the Revised Code, a science, technology, engineering, and mathematics school established under
Chapter 3326. of the Revised Code, educational institutions, technical colleges, state, municipal, and
community colleges, community college branches, universities, university branches, other
educational institutions, or other agencies within the state by which an employee is employed and
paid, including any organization using federal funds, provided the federal funds are disbursed by an
employer as determined by the above. In all cases of doubt, the school employees retirement board
shall determine whether any employer is an employer as defined in this chapter, and its decision shall
be final.
         (B) "Employee" means all of the following:
         (1) Any person employed by a public employer in a position for which the person is not
required to have a registration, certificate, or license issued pursuant to section 3301.28 or sections
3319.22 to 3319.31 of the Revised Code;
         (2) Any person who performs a service common to the normal daily operation of an
educational unit even though the person is employed and paid by one who has contracted with an
employer to perform the service, and the contracting board or educational unit shall be the employer
for the purposes of administering the provisions of this chapter;
         (3) Any person, not a faculty member, employed in any school or college or other institution
wholly controlled and managed, and wholly or partly supported by the state or any political
subdivision thereof, the board of trustees, or other managing body of which shall accept the
requirements and obligations of this chapter.
         In all cases of doubt, the school employees retirement board shall determine whether any
person is an employee, as defined in this division, and its decision is final.
         (C) "Prior service" means all service rendered prior to September 1, 1937:
         (1) As an employee as defined in division (B) of this section;
         (2) As an employee in a capacity covered by the public employees retirement system or the
state teachers retirement system;
         (3) As an employee of an institution in another state, service credit for which was procured by
a member under the provisions of section 3309.31 of the Revised Code.
         Prior service, for service as an employee in a capacity covered by the public employees
retirement system or the state teachers retirement system, shall be granted a member under
qualifications identical to the laws and rules applicable to service credit in those systems.
         Prior service shall not be granted any member for service rendered in a capacity covered by
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                           134th G.A.
                                                   18
the public employees retirement system, the state teachers retirement system, and this system in the
event the service credit has, in the respective systems, been received, waived by exemption, or
forfeited by withdrawal of contributions, except as provided in this chapter.
         If a member who has been granted prior service should, subsequent to September 16, 1957,
and before retirement, establish three years of contributing service in the public employees retirement
system, or one year in the state teachers retirement system, then the prior service granted shall
become, at retirement, the liability of the other system, if the prior service or employment was in a
capacity that is covered by that system.
         The provisions of this division shall not cancel any prior service granted a member by the
school employees retirement board prior to August 1, 1959.
         (D) "Total service," "total service credit," or "Ohio service credit" means all contributing
service of a member of the school employees retirement system, and all prior service, computed as
provided in this chapter, and all service established pursuant to sections 3309.31, 3309.311, and
3309.33 of the Revised Code. In addition, "total service" includes any period, not in excess of three
years, during which a member was out of service and receiving benefits from the state insurance
fund, provided the injury or incapacitation was the direct result of school employment.
         (E) "Member" means any employee, except an SERS retirant or other system retirant as
defined in section 3309.341 of the Revised Code, who has established membership in the school
employees retirement system. "Member" includes a disability benefit recipient.
         (F) "Contributor" means any person who has an account in the employees' savings fund.
When used in the sections listed in division (B) of section 3309.82 of the Revised Code,
"contributor" includes any person participating in a plan established under section 3309.81 of the
Revised Code.
         (G) "Retirant" means any former member who retired and is receiving a retirement allowance
under section 3309.36 or 3309.381 or former section 3309.38 of the Revised Code.
         (H) "Beneficiary" or "beneficiaries" means the estate or a person or persons who, as the result
of the death of a contributor or retirant, qualifies for or is receiving some right or benefit under this
chapter.
         (I) "Interest," as specified in division (E) of section 3309.60 of the Revised Code, means
interest at the rates for the respective funds and accounts as the school employees retirement board
may determine from time to time.
         (J) "Accumulated contributions" means the sum of all amounts credited to a contributor's
account in the employees' savings fund together with any regular interest credited thereon at the rates
approved by the retirement board prior to retirement.
         (K) "Final average salary" means the sum of the annual compensation for the three highest
years of compensation for which contributions were made by the member, divided by three. If the
member has a partial year of contributing service in the year in which the member terminates
employment and the partial year is at a rate of compensation that is higher than the rate of
compensation for any one of the highest three years of annual earnings, the board shall substitute the
compensation earned for the partial year for the compensation earned for a similar fractional portion
in the lowest of the three high years of annual compensation before dividing by three. If a member
has less than three years of contributing membership, the final average salary shall be the total
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                          134th G.A.
                                                  19
compensation divided by the total number of years, including any fraction of a year, of contributing
service.
         (L) "Annuity" means payments for life derived from contributions made by a contributor and
paid from the annuity and pension reserve fund as provided in this chapter. All annuities shall be paid
in twelve equal monthly installments.
         (M)(1) "Pension" means annual payments for life derived from appropriations made by an
employer and paid from the employers' trust fund or the annuity and pension reserve fund. All
pensions shall be paid in twelve equal monthly installments.
         (2) "Disability retirement" means retirement as provided in section 3309.40 of the Revised
Code.
         (N) "Retirement allowance" means the pension plus the annuity.
         (O)(1) "Benefit" means a payment, other than a retirement allowance or the annuity paid
under section 3309.344 of the Revised Code, payable from the accumulated contributions of the
member or the employer, or both, under this chapter and includes a disability allowance or disability
benefit.
         (2) "Disability allowance" means an allowance paid on account of disability under section
3309.401 of the Revised Code.
         (3) "Disability benefit" means a benefit paid as disability retirement under section 3309.40 of
the Revised Code, as a disability allowance under section 3309.401 of the Revised Code, or as a
disability benefit under section 3309.35 of the Revised Code.
         (P) "Annuity reserve" means the present value, computed upon the basis of mortality tables
adopted by the school employees retirement board, of all payments to be made on account of any
annuity, or benefit in lieu of any annuity, granted to a retirant.
         (Q) "Pension reserve" means the present value, computed upon the basis of mortality tables
adopted by the school employees retirement board, of all payments to be made on account of any
pension, or benefit in lieu of any pension, granted to a retirant or a beneficiary.
         (R) "Year" means the year beginning the first day of July and ending with the thirtieth day of
June next following.
         (S) "Local district pension system" means any school employees' pension fund created in any
school district of the state prior to September 1, 1937.
         (T) "Employer contribution" means the amount paid by an employer as determined under
section 3309.49 of the Revised Code.
         (U) "Fiduciary" means a person who does any of the following:
         (1) Exercises any discretionary authority or control with respect to the management of the
system, or with respect to the management or disposition of its assets;
         (2) Renders investment advice for a fee, direct or indirect, with respect to money or property
of the system;
         (3) Has any discretionary authority or responsibility in the administration of the system.
         (V)(1) Except as otherwise provided in this division, "compensation" means all salary, wages,
and other earnings paid to a contributor by reason of employment. The salary, wages, and other
earnings shall be determined prior to determination of the amount required to be contributed to the
employees' savings fund under section 3309.47 of the Revised Code and without regard to whether
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                           134th G.A.
                                                   20
any of the salary, wages, or other earnings are treated as deferred income for federal income tax
purposes.
         (2) Compensation does not include any of the following:
         (a) Payments for accrued but unused sick leave or personal leave, including payments made
under a plan established pursuant to section 124.39 of the Revised Code or any other plan established
by the employer;
         (b) Payments made for accrued but unused vacation leave, including payments made pursuant
to section 124.13 of the Revised Code or a plan established by the employer;
         (c) Payments made for vacation pay covering concurrent periods for which other salary or
compensation is also paid or during which benefits are paid under this chapter;
         (d) Amounts paid by the employer to provide life insurance, sickness, accident, endowment,
health, medical, hospital, dental, or surgical coverage, or other insurance for the contributor or the
contributor's family, or amounts paid by the employer to the contributor in lieu of providing the
insurance;
         (e) Incidental benefits, including lodging, food, laundry, parking, or services furnished by the
employer, use of the employer's property or equipment, and reimbursement for job-related expenses
authorized by the employer, including moving and travel expenses and expenses related to
professional development;
         (f) Payments made to or on behalf of a contributor that are in excess of the annual
compensation that may be taken into account by the retirement system under division (a)(17) of
section 401 of the "Internal Revenue Code of 1986," 100 Stat. 2085, 26 U.S.C.A. 401(a)(17), as
amended. For a contributor who first establishes membership before July 1, 1996, the annual
compensation that may be taken into account by the retirement system shall be determined under
division (d)(3) of section 13212 of the "Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993," Pub. L. No.
103-66, 107 Stat. 472;
         (g) Payments made under division (B), (C), or (E) of section 5923.05 of the Revised Code,
Section 4 of Substitute Senate Bill No. 3 of the 119th general assembly, Section 3 of Amended
Substitute Senate Bill No. 164 of the 124th general assembly, or Amended Substitute House Bill No.
405 of the 124th general assembly;
         (h) Anything of value received by the contributor that is based on or attributable to retirement
or an agreement to retire, except that payments made on or before January 1, 1989, that are based on
or attributable to an agreement to retire shall be included in compensation if both of the following
apply:
         (i) The payments are made in accordance with contract provisions that were in effect prior to
January 1, 1986.
         (ii) The employer pays the retirement system an amount specified by the retirement board
equal to the additional liability from the payments.
         (3) The retirement board shall determine by rule whether any form of earnings not
enumerated in this division is to be included in compensation, and its decision shall be final.
         (W) "Disability benefit recipient" means a member who is receiving a disability benefit.
         (X) "Actuary" means an individual who satisfies all of the following requirements:
         (1) Is a member of the American academy of actuaries;
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                           134th G.A.
                                                   21
         (2) Is an associate or fellow of the society of actuaries;
         (3) Has a minimum of five years' experience in providing actuarial services to public
retirement plans.
         Sec. 3310.032. (A) A student is an "eligible student" for purposes of the expansion of the
educational choice scholarship pilot program under this section if the student's resident district is not
a school district in which the pilot project scholarship program is operating under sections 3313.974
to 3313.979 of the Revised Code, the student is not eligible for an educational choice scholarship
under section 3310.03 of the Revised Code, and the either of the following apply:
         (1) The student's family income is at or below two hundred fifty per cent of the federal
poverty guidelines, as defined in section 5101.46 of the Revised Code, when the student applies for a
scholarship under this section.
         (2) The student's sibling, as defined in section 3310.033 of the Revised Code, receives a
scholarship under this section for at least one of the following:
         (a) For the school year immediately prior to the school year for which the student is seeking a
scholarship;
         (b) For the school year for which the student is seeking a scholarship.
         (B) In each fiscal year for which the general assembly appropriates funds for purposes of this
section, the department of education shall pay scholarships to attend chartered nonpublic schools in
accordance with section 3317.022 of the Revised Code. The number of scholarships awarded under
this section shall not exceed the number that can be funded for that school year as authorized by the
general assembly.
         (C) Scholarships under this section shall be awarded as follows:
         (1) For the 2013-2014 school year, to eligible students who are entering kindergarten in that
school year for the first time;
         (2) For each subsequent school year through the 2019-2020 school year, scholarships shall be
awarded to eligible students in the next grade level above the highest grade level awarded in the
preceding school year, in addition to the grade levels for which students received scholarships in the
preceding school year;
         (3) Beginning with the 2020-2021 school year, to eligible students who are entering any of
grades kindergarten through twelve in that school year for the first time.
         (D) If the number of eligible students who apply for a scholarship under this section exceeds
the scholarships available based on the appropriation for this section, the department shall award
scholarships in the following order of priority:
         (1) First, to eligible students who received scholarships under this section in the prior school
year;
         (2) Second, to eligible students with family incomes at or below one hundred per cent of the
federal poverty guidelines. If the number of students described in division (D)(2) of this section who
apply for a scholarship exceeds the number of available scholarships after awards are made under
division (D)(1) of this section, the department shall select students described in division (D)(2) of
this section by lot to receive any remaining scholarships.
         (3) Third, to other eligible students who qualify under this section. If the number of students
described in division (D)(3) of this section exceeds the number of available scholarships after awards
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                            134th G.A.
                                                   22
are made under divisions (D)(1) and (2) of this section, the department shall select students described
in division (D)(3) of this section by lot to receive any remaining scholarships.
         (E) Subject to divisions (E)(1) to (3) of this section, a A student who receives a scholarship
under this section remains an eligible student and may continue to receive scholarships under this
section in subsequent school years until the student completes grade twelve, so long as the student
satisfies the conditions specified in divisions (D)(2) and (3) of section 3310.03 of the Revised Code.
         Once a scholarship is awarded under this section, the student shall remain eligible for that
scholarship for the current school year and subsequent school years even if the student's family
income rises above the amount specified in division (A) of this section, provided the student remains
enrolled in a chartered nonpublic school, however:
         (1) If the student's family income is above two hundred fifty per cent but at or below three
hundred per cent of the federal poverty guidelines, the student shall receive a scholarship in the
amount of seventy-five per cent of the full scholarship amount.
         (2) If the student's family income is above three hundred per cent but at or below four
hundred per cent of the federal poverty guidelines, the student shall receive a scholarship in the
amount of fifty per cent of the full scholarship amount.
         (3) If the student's family income is above four hundred per cent of the federal poverty
guidelines, the student is no longer eligible to receive an educational choice scholarship.
         Sec. 3310.70. (A) A student is an "eligible student" for purposes of this section if the student
is at least six but no more than eighteen years old and the student's family income is at or below three
hundred per cent of the federal poverty guidelines, as defined in section 5101.46 of the Revised
Code.
         (B)(1) There is hereby established the afterschool child enrichment (ACE) educational
savings account program. Not later than thirty days after the effective date of this section, the The
department of education shall adopt emergency rules under Chapter 119. of the Revised Code that
prescribe procedures for the establishment of these accounts for in fiscal years 2022 and 2023 upon
the request of the parent or guardian of an eligible student enrolled in a public or nonpublic school or
an eligible student who has been excused from the compulsory attendance law for the purpose of
home instruction under section 3321.04 of the Revised Code. Accounts shall be established on a first-
come, first-served basis according to the availability of funds appropriated for purposes of this
section.
         Accounts shall be used in accordance with division (E) of this section. Any balance
remaining in a student's account after fiscal year 2023 shall remain in that account for use as
prescribed in division (D)(3) of this section.
         (2) Not later than one hundred twenty days after the effective date of this section, the The
department shall create an online form for parents and guardians to request the establishment of an
account under this section.
         (C)(1) The department shall contract with a vendor for purposes of administering the
provisions of this section and may contract with the treasurer of state for technical assistance. In
selecting a vendor, the department shall give preference to those vendors who use a smart phone
application that is free for parents or guardians to use, is capable of scanning receipts, allows users to
provide program feedback, and includes customer service contact information for parents and
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                          134th G.A.
                                                  23
guardians who experience technical issues with the application. For fiscal year 2022 or fiscal year
2023each fiscal year in which the program operates, the department shall pay the vendor not more
than three per cent of the amount appropriated for that fiscal year for purposes of this section.
         (2) The vendor selected by the department under division (C)(2) of this section shall do both
of the following:
         (a) Monitor how accounts are used by parents or guardians and recoup moneys that are used
for purposes that are not authorized by this section as determined by the vendor;
         (b) Provide the department with a comprehensive list of purchases made with accounts.
         (3) At no time shall the vendor authorize parents or guardians to use moneys for purposes that
are not authorized by this section as determined by the vendor. If the vendor authorizes parents or
guardians to use moneys for a specified purpose and later determines that purpose is not authorized
by this section, the vendor may recoup that money.
         (D)(1) If a parent or guardian makes a request under division (B) of this section during fiscal
year 2022, five hundred dollars shall be credited to the account established pursuant to the parent's or
guardian's request within fourteen days of the parent's or guardian's request, and that amount shall be
disbursed upon request to the parent or guardian not later than June 30, 2022, for use in accordance
with division (E) of this section. Any amount remaining in an account at the end of fiscal year 2022
shall remain in that account for fiscal year 2023 for use in accordance with division (E) of this
section.
         (2) If a parent or guardian makes a request under division (B) of this section during fiscal
year 2023, five hundred dollars shall be credited to the account established pursuant to the parent's or
guardian's request within fourteen days of the parent's or guardian's request, and that amount shall be
disbursed upon request to the parent or guardian not later than June 30, 2023, for use in accordance
with division (E) of this section. If a parent or guardian had an account established for fiscal year
2022, that amount shall be credited and distributed to that account for use in accordance with division
(E) of this section.
         (3) Any amount remaining in an account established under division (B) of this section at the
end of fiscal year 2023 shall remain in that account for use in accordance with division (E) of this
section in future fiscal years until either the full amount has been spent or the student graduates from
high school. Any amount remaining in the account of a student who graduates from high school shall
be returned to the department.
         (E) Subject to division (F) of this section, moneys credited to an education savings account
established under division (B) of this section shall be used by an eligible student's parent or guardian
for any of the following purposes, whether secular or nonsecular:
         (1) Before- or after-school educational programs;
         (2) Day camps, including camps for academics, music, and arts;
         (3) Tuition at learning extension centers;
         (4) Tuition for learning pods;
         (5) If the student has been excused from the compulsory attendance law for the purpose of
home instruction under section 3321.04 of the Revised Code, purchase of curriculum and materials;
         (6) Educational, learning, or study skills services;
         (7) Field trips to historical landmarks, museums, science centers, and theaters, including
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                         134th G.A.
                                                  24
admission, exhibit, and program fees;
         (8) Language classes;
         (9) Instrument lessons;
         (10) Tutoring.
         (F) At no time shall moneys credited to an account established under division (B) of this
section be used for the purchase of electronic devices.
         (G) The department shall make available to parents and guardians a list of the purposes for
which moneys credited to an account established under division (B) of this section may be spent in
accordance with division (E) of this section.
         (H) Not later than December 31, 2023, the department shall prepare a report regarding the
administration of this section, including feedback from a random sampling of parents and guardians
who participate in the program for fiscal year 2022, fiscal year 2023, or both and submit the report to
the general assembly in accordance with section 101.68 of the Revised Code.
         Sec. 3313.976. (A) No private school may receive scholarship payments from parents
pursuant to section 3317.022 of the Revised Code until the chief administrator of the private school
registers the school with the superintendent of public instruction. The state superintendent shall
register any school that meets the following requirements:
         (1) The school offers any of grades kindergarten through twelve and eitherdoes any of the
following:
         (a) Is Offers any of grades kindergarten through twelve and is located within the boundaries
of the pilot project school district;
         (b) Is Offers any of grades kindergarten through twelve and is located within the boundaries
of a city, local, or exempted village school district that is both:
         (i) Located in a municipal corporation with a population of fifteen thousand or more;
         (ii) Located within five miles of the border of the pilot project school district.
         (c) Offers all of grades pre-kindergarten through eight, but not any of grades nine through
twelve, and is located within the boundaries of a city, local, or exempted village school district that
is:
         (i) Located in a municipal corporation with a population of greater than ten thousand but less
than thirteen thousand;
         (ii) Located within five miles of the border of the pilot project school district;
         (iii) Located in the same county as the pilot project school district.
         (2) The school indicates in writing its commitment to follow all requirements for a state-
sponsored scholarship program specified under sections 3313.974 to 3313.979 of the Revised Code,
including, but not limited to, the requirements for admitting students pursuant to section 3313.977 of
the Revised Code;
         (3) The school meets all state minimum standards for chartered nonpublic schools in effect on
July 1, 1992, except that the state superintendent at the superintendent's discretion may register
nonchartered nonpublic schools meeting the other requirements of this division;
         (4) The school does not discriminate on the basis of race, religion, or ethnic background;
         (5) The school enrolls a minimum of ten students per class or a sum of at least twenty-five
students in all the classes offered;
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                            134th G.A.
                                                   25
         (6) The school does not advocate or foster unlawful behavior or teach hatred of any person or
group on the basis of race, ethnicity, national origin, or religion;
         (7) The school does not provide false or misleading information about the school to parents,
students, or the general public;
         (8) For students in grades kindergarten through eight with family incomes at or below two
hundred per cent of the federal poverty guidelines, as defined in section 5104.46 of the Revised
Code, the school agrees not to charge any tuition in excess of the scholarship amount established
pursuant to division (A)(11)(a) of section 3317.022 of the Revised Code, excluding any increase
described in that division.
         (9) For students in grades kindergarten through eight with family incomes above two hundred
per cent of the federal poverty guidelines, whose scholarship amounts are less than the actual tuition
charge of the school, the school agrees not to charge any tuition in excess of the difference between
the actual tuition charge of the school and the scholarship amount established pursuant to division
(A)(11)(a) of section 3317.022 of the Revised Code, excluding any increase described in that
division. The school shall permit such tuition, at the discretion of the parent, to be satisfied by the
family's provision of in-kind contributions or services.
         (10) The school agrees not to charge any tuition to families of students in grades nine through
twelve receiving a scholarship in excess of the actual tuition charge of the school less the scholarship
amount established pursuant to division (A)(11)(a) of section 3317.022 of the Revised Code,
excluding any increase described in that division.
         (11) It annually administers the applicable assessments prescribed by section 3301.0710,
3301.0712, or 3313.619 of the Revised Code to each scholarship student enrolled in the school in
accordance with section 3301.0711 or 3301.0712 of the Revised Code and reports to the department
of education the results of each such assessment administered to each scholarship student, unless one
of the following applies to the student:
         (a) The student is excused from taking that assessment under federal law, the student's
individualized education program, or division (C)(1)(c)(i) of section 3301.0711 of the Revised Code.
         (b) The student is enrolled in a chartered nonpublic school that meets the conditions specified
in division (K)(2) or (L)(4) of section 3301.0711 of the Revised Code.
         (c) The student is enrolled in any of grades three to eight and takes an alternative
standardized assessment under division (K)(1) of section 3301.0711 of the Revised Code.
         (d) The student is excused from taking the assessment prescribed under division (B)(1) of
section 3301.0712 of the Revised Code pursuant to division (C)(1)(c)(ii) of section 3301.0711 of the
Revised Code.
         (B) The state superintendent shall revoke the registration of any school if, after a hearing, the
superintendent determines that the school is in violation of any of the provisions of division (A) of
this section.
         (C) Any public school located in a school district adjacent to the pilot project school district
may receive scholarship payments on behalf of parents pursuant to section 3317.022 of the Revised
Code if the superintendent of the district in which such public school is located notifies the state
superintendent prior to the first day of March that the district intends to admit students from the pilot
project school district for the ensuing school year pursuant to section 3327.06 of the Revised Code.
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                          134th G.A.
                                                  26
        (D) Any parent wishing to purchase tutorial assistance from any person or governmental
entity pursuant to the pilot project program under sections 3313.974 to 3313.979 of the Revised Code
shall apply to the state superintendent. The state superintendent shall approve providers who appear
to possess the capability of furnishing the instructional services they are offering to provide.
        Sec. 3314.016. This section applies to any entity that sponsors a community school,
regardless of whether section 3314.021 or 3314.027 of the Revised Code exempts the entity from the
requirement to be approved for sponsorship under divisions (A)(2) and (B)(1) of section 3314.015 of
the Revised Code. The office of Ohio school sponsorship established under section 3314.029 of the
Revised Code shall be rated under division (B) of this section, but divisions (A) and (C) of this
section do not apply to the office.
        (A) An entity that sponsors a community school shall be permitted to enter into contracts
under section 3314.03 of the Revised Code to sponsor additional community schools only if the
entity meets all of the following criteria:
        (1) The entity is in compliance with all provisions of this chapter requiring sponsors of
community schools to report data or information to the department of education.
        (2) The entity is not rated as "ineffective" under division (B)(6) of this section.
        (3) Except as set forth in sections 3314.021 and 3314.027 of the Revised Code, the entity has
received approval from and entered into an agreement with the department of education pursuant to
section 3314.015 of the Revised Code.
        (B)(1) The department shall develop and implement an evaluation system that annually rates
and assigns an overall rating to each entity that sponsors a community school. The department, not
later than the first day of February of each year, shall post on the department's web site the
framework for the evaluation system, including technical documentation that the department intends
to use to rate sponsors for the next school year. The department shall solicit public comment on the
evaluation system for thirty consecutive days. Not later than the first day of April of each year, the
department shall compile and post on the department's web site all public comments that were
received during the public comment period. The evaluation system shall be posted on the
department's web site by the fifteenth day of July of each school year. Any changes to the evaluation
system after that date shall take effect the following year. The evaluation system shall be based on the
following components:
        (a) Academic performance of students enrolled in community schools sponsored by the same
entity. The academic performance component shall be derived from the performance measures
prescribed for the state report cards under section 3302.03 or 3314.017 of the Revised Code, and
shall be based on the performance of the schools for the school year for which the evaluation is
conducted. In addition to the academic performance for a specific school year, the academic
performance component shall also include year-to-year changes in the overall sponsor portfolio. For
a community school for which no graded performance measures are applicable or available, the
department shall use nonreport card performance measures specified in the contract between the
community school and the sponsor under division (A)(4) of section 3314.03 of the Revised Code.
        (b) Adherence by a sponsor to the quality practices prescribed by the department under
division (B)(3) of this section. For a sponsor that was rated "effective" or "exemplary" on its most
recent rating, the department may evaluate that sponsor's adherence to quality practices once over a
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                          134th G.A.
                                                  27
period of three years. If the department elects to evaluate a sponsor once over a period of three years,
the most recent rating for a sponsor's adherence to quality practices shall be used when determining
an annual overall rating conducted under this section.
        (c) Compliance with all applicable laws and administrative rules by an entity that sponsors a
community school.
        Under the evaluation system prescribed under division (B)(1) of this section, the department
shall not assign an overall rating of "ineffective" or lower to an entity that sponsors a community
school solely because that entity received no points on one of the components prescribed under that
division.
        (2) In calculating an academic performance component, the department shall exclude all
community schools that have been in operation for not more than two full school years and all
community schools described in division (A)(4)(b) of section 3314.35 of the Revised Code.
However, the academic performance of the community schools described in division (A)(4)(b) of
section 3314.35 of the Revised Code shall be reported, but shall not be used as a factor when
determining a sponsoring entity's rating under this section.
        (3) The department, in consultation with entities that sponsor community schools, shall
prescribe quality practices for community school sponsors and develop an instrument to measure
adherence to those quality practices. The quality practices shall be based on standards developed by
the national association of charter school authorizers or any other nationally organized community
school organization.
        (4)(a) The department may permit peer review of a sponsor's adherence to the quality
practices prescribed under division (B)(3) of this section. Peer reviewers shall be limited to
individuals employed by sponsors rated "effective" or "exemplary" on the most recent ratings
conducted under this section.
        (b) The department shall require individuals participating in peer review under division (B)
(4)(a) of this section to complete training approved or established by the department.
        (c) The department may enter into an agreement with another entity to provide training to
individuals conducting peer review of sponsors. Prior to entering into an agreement with an entity,
the department shall review and approve of the entity's training program.
        (5) Not later than July 1, 2013, the The state board of education shall adopt rules in
accordance with Chapter 119. of the Revised Code prescribing standards for measuring compliance
with applicable laws and rules under division (B)(1)(c) of this section.
        (6) The department annually shall rate all entities that sponsor community schools as either
"exemplary," "effective," "ineffective," or "poor," based on the components prescribed by division
(B) of this section, where each component is weighted equally. A separate rating shall be given by the
department for each component of the evaluation system.
        The department shall publish the ratings between the first day of October and the fifteenth
day of November.
        Prior to the publication of the final ratings, the department shall designate and provide notice
of a period of at least ten business days during which each sponsor may review the information used
by the department to determine the sponsor's rating on the components prescribed by division (B)(1)
of this section. If the sponsor believes there is an error in the department's evaluation, the sponsor
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                           134th G.A.
                                                   28
may request adjustments to the rating of any of those components based on documentation
previously submitted as part of an evaluation. The sponsor shall provide to the department any
necessary evidence or information to support the requested adjustments. The department shall review
the evidence and information, determine whether an adjustment is valid, and promptly notify the
sponsor of its determination and reasons. If any adjustments to the data could result in a change to the
rating on the applicable component or to the overall rating, the department shall recalculate the
ratings prior to publication.
         The department shall provide training on an annual basis regarding the evaluation system
prescribed under this section. The training shall, at a minimum, describe methodology, timelines, and
data required for the evaluation system. The first training session shall occur not later than March 2,
2016. Beginning in 2018, the training shall be made available to each entity that sponsors a
community school by the fifteenth day of July of each year and shall include guidance on any
changes made to the evaluation system.
         (7)(a) Entities with an overall rating of "exemplary" for the two most recent years in which
the entity was evaluated may take advantage of the following incentives:
         (i) Renewal of the written agreement with the department, not to exceed ten years, provided
that the entity consents to continued evaluation of adherence to quality practices as described in
division (B)(1)(b) of this section;
         (ii) The ability to extend the term of the contract between the sponsoring entity and the
community school beyond the term described in the written agreement with the department;
         (iii) An exemption from the preliminary agreement and contract adoption and execution
deadline requirements prescribed in division (D) of section 3314.02 of the Revised Code;
         (iv) An exemption from the automatic contract expiration requirement, should a new
community school fail to open by the thirtieth day of September of the calendar year in which the
community school contract is executed;
         (v) No limit on the number of community schools the entity may sponsor;
         (vi) No territorial restrictions on sponsorship.
         An entity may continue to sponsor any community schools with which it entered into
agreements under division (B)(7)(a)(v) or (vi) of this section while rated "exemplary,"
notwithstanding the fact that the entity later receives a lower overall rating.
         (b) Entities with an overall rating of "exemplary" or "effective" for the three most recent
years in which the entity was evaluated shall be evaluated by the department once every three years.
         (c)(i) Entities that receive an overall rating of "ineffective" shall be prohibited from
sponsoring any new or additional community schools during the time in which the sponsor is rated as
"ineffective" and shall be subject to a quality improvement plan based on correcting the deficiencies
that led to the "ineffective" rating, with timelines and benchmarks that have been established by the
department.
         (ii) Entities that receive an overall rating of "ineffective" on their three most recent ratings
shall have all sponsorship authority revoked. Within thirty days after receiving its third rating of
"ineffective," the entity may appeal the revocation of its sponsorship authority to the superintendent
of public instruction, who shall appoint an independent hearing officer to conduct a hearing in
accordance with Chapter 119. of the Revised Code. The hearing shall be conducted within thirty days
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                         134th G.A.
                                                  29
after receipt of the notice of appeal. Within forty-five days after the hearing is completed, the state
board of education shall determine whether the revocation is appropriate based on the hearing
conducted by the independent hearing officer, and if determined appropriate, the revocation shall be
confirmed.
        (d) Entities that receive an overall rating of "poor" shall have all sponsorship authority
revoked. Within thirty days after receiving a rating of "poor," the entity may appeal the revocation of
its sponsorship authority to the superintendent of public instruction, who shall appoint an
independent hearing officer to conduct a hearing in accordance with Chapter 119. of the Revised
Code. The hearing shall be conducted within thirty days after receipt of the notice of appeal. Within
forty-five days after the hearing is completed, the state board of education shall determine whether
the revocation is appropriate based on the hearing conducted by the independent hearing officer, and
if determined appropriate, the revocation shall be confirmed.
        (8) For the 2014-2015 school year and each school year thereafter, student academic
performance prescribed under division (B)(1)(a) of this section shall include student academic
performance data from community schools that primarily serve students enrolled in a dropout
prevention and recovery program.
        (C) If the governing authority of a community school enters into a contract with a sponsor
prior to the date on which the sponsor is prohibited from sponsoring additional schools under
division (A) of this section and the school has not opened for operation as of that date, that contract
shall be void and the school shall not open until the governing authority secures a new sponsor by
entering into a contract with the new sponsor under section 3314.03 of the Revised Code. However,
the department's office of Ohio school sponsorship, established under section 3314.029 of the
Revised Code, may assume the sponsorship of the school until the earlier of the expiration of two
school years or until a new sponsor is secured by the school's governing authority. A community
school sponsored by the department under this division shall not be included when calculating the
maximum number of directly authorized community schools permitted under division (A)(3) of
section 3314.029 of the Revised Code.
        (D) When an entity's authority to sponsor schools is revoked pursuant to division (B)(7)(c) or
(d) of this section, the office of Ohio school sponsorship shall assume sponsorship of any schools
with which the original sponsor has contracted for the remainder of that school year. The office may
continue sponsoring those schools until the earlier of:
        (1) The expiration of two school years from the time that sponsorship is revoked;
        (2) When a new sponsor is secured by the governing authority pursuant to division (C)(1) of
section 3314.02 of the Revised Code.
        Any community school sponsored under this division shall not be counted for purposes of
directly authorized community schools under division (A)(3) of section 3314.029 of the Revised
Code.
        (E) The department shall recalculate the rating for the 2017-2018 school year for each
sponsor of a community school that receives recalculated ratings pursuant to division (I) of section
3314.017 of the Revised Code.
        Sec. 3314.021. (A) This section applies to any entity that is exempt from taxation under
section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and that satisfies the conditions specified in divisions
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                            134th G.A.
                                                   30
(C)(1)(f)(ii) and (iii) of section 3314.02 of the Revised Code but does not satisfy the condition
specified in division (C)(1)(f)(i) of that section.
         (B) Notwithstanding division (C)(1)(f)(i) of section 3314.02 of the Revised Code, and subject
to division (D)(2) of this section, an entity described in division (A) of this section may do both of
the following without obtaining the department of education's initial approval of its sponsorship
under divisions (A)(2) and (B)(1) of section 3314.015 of the Revised Code:
         (1) Succeed the board of trustees of a state university located in the pilot project area or that
board's designee as the sponsor of a community school established under this chapter;
         (2) Continue to sponsor that school in conformance with the terms of the contract between
the board of trustees or its designee and the governing authority of the community school and renew
that contract as provided in division (E) of section 3314.03 of the Revised Code.
         (C) The entity that succeeds the board of trustees or the board's designee as sponsor of a
community school under division (B) of this section also may enter into contracts to sponsor other
community schools regardless of the proposed school's location, without obtaining the department's
initial approval of its sponsorship of those schools under divisions (A)(2) and (B)(1) of section
3314.015 of the Revised Code as long as the contracts conform with and the entity complies with all
other requirements of this chapter.
         (D)(1) Regardless of the entity's authority to sponsor community schools without the initial
approval of the department, the entity is under the continuing oversight of the department in
accordance with rules adopted under section 3314.015 of the Revised Code.
         (2) If an entity described in division (A) of this section receives a rating below "effective"
under division (B) of section 3314.016 of the Revised Code for two or more consecutive years, that
entity shall receive approval from the department of education to sponsor community schools and
enter into a written agreement with the department in accordance with division (B)(1) of section
3314.015 of the Revised Code prior to entering into any further preliminary agreements under
division (C)(2) of section 3314.02 of the Revised Code or renewing any existing contract to sponsor
a community school.
         (E)(1) As used in division (E) of this section:
         (a) "Board of trustees" means a board of trustees of a state university located in the pilot
project area.
         (b) "Rating" means a sponsor rating under section 3314.016 of the Revised Code.
         (2) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in division (B)(7)(b) of section 3314.016 of the
Revised Code, for the purposes of that division, the department shall consider an entity that
succeeded a board of trustees as the sponsor of a community school in accordance with division (B)
(1) of this section to have received the same rating for the 2016-2017 school year as the board of
trustees, provided all of the following apply:
         (a) The department assigned the board of trustees a rating of either "effective" or "exemplary"
for the 2016-2017 school year.
         (b) The department did not assign the entity its own rating for the 2016-2017 school year.
         (c) The department assigned the entity its own rating for the 2017-2018 school year.
         Sec. 3314.074. Divisions (A) and (B) of this section apply only to the extent permitted under
Chapter 1702. of the Revised Code.
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                           134th G.A.
                                                   31
         (A) If any community school established under this chapter permanently closes and ceases its
operation as a community school, the assets of that school shall be distributed first to the retirement
funds of employees of the school, employees of the school, and private creditors who are owed
compensation, and then any remaining funds shall be paid to the department of education for
redistribution to the school districts in which the students who were enrolled in the school at the time
it ceased operation were entitled to attend school under section 3313.64 or 3313.65 of the Revised
Code. The amount distributed to each school district shall be proportional to the district's share of the
total enrollment in the community school. For any community school that closes after fiscal year
2021, any remaining funds shall be paid to the department of education and deposited into the state
general revenue fund.
         (B) If a community school closes and ceases to operate as a community school and the school
has received computer hardware or software from the former Ohio SchoolNet commission or the
former eTech Ohio commission, such hardware or software shall be turned over to the department of
education, which shall redistribute the hardware and software, to the extent such redistribution is
possible, to school districts in conformance with the provisions of the programs as they were
operated and administered by the former eTech Ohio commission.
         (C) If the assets of the school are insufficient to pay all persons or entities to whom
compensation is owed, the prioritization of the distribution of the assets to individual persons or
entities within each class of payees may be determined by decree of a court in accordance with this
section and Chapter 1702. of the Revised Code.
         (D) A community school that engages in a merger or consolidation pursuant to division (B) of
section 1702.41 of the Revised Code and becomes a single public benefit corporation shall not be
required to distribute assets pursuant to divisions (A), (B), and (C) of this section, provided that the
governing authority of the community school created by the merger or consolidation enters into a
contract for sponsorship under section 3314.03 of the Revised Code with an entity rated "effective"
or higher by the department of education pursuant to section 3314.016 of the Revised Code.
         Sec. 3317.011. This section shall apply only for fiscal years 2022 and 2023.
         (A) As used in this section:
         (1) "Average administrative assistant salary" means the average salary of administrative
assistants employed by city, local, and exempted village school districts in this state with salaries
greater than $20,000 but less than $65,000 for the most recent fiscal year for which data is available,
using fiscal year 2018 data, as determined by the department of education.
         (2) "Average bookkeeping and accounting employee salary" means the average salary of
bookkeeping employees and accounting employees employed by city, local, and exempted village
school districts in this state with salaries greater than $20,000 but less than $80,000 for the most
recent fiscal year for which data is available, using fiscal year 2018 data, as determined by the
department.
         (3) "Average clerical staff salary" means the average salary of clerical staff employed by city,
local, and exempted village school districts in this state with salaries greater than $15,000 but less
than $50,000 for the most recent fiscal year for which data is available, using fiscal year 2018 data,
as determined by the department.
         (4) "Average counselor salary" means the average salary of counselors employed by city,
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                               134th G.A.
                                                     32
local, and exempted village school districts in this state with salaries greater than $30,000 but less
than $95,000 for the most recent fiscal year for which data is available, using fiscal year 2018 data,
as determined by the department.
         (5) "Average education management information system support employee salary" means the
average salary of accounting employees employed by city, local, and exempted village school
districts in this state with salaries greater than $30,000 but less than $90,000 for the most recent fiscal
year for which data is available, using fiscal year 2018 data, as determined by the department.
         (6) "Average librarian and media staff salary" means the average salary of librarians and
media staff employed by city, local, and exempted village school districts in this state with salaries
greater than $30,000 but less than $95,000 for the most recent fiscal year for which data is available,
using fiscal year 2018 data, as determined by the department.
         (7) "Average other district administrator salary" means the average salary of all assistant
superintendents and directors employed by city, local, and exempted village school districts in this
state with salaries greater than $50,000 but less than $135,000 for the most recent fiscal year for
which data is available, using fiscal year 2018 data, as determined by the department.
         (8) "Average principal salary" means the average salary of all principals employed by city,
local, and exempted village school districts in this state with salaries greater than $50,000 but less
than $120,000 for the most recent fiscal year for which data is available, using fiscal year 2018 data,
as determined by the department.
         (9) "Average superintendent salary" means the average salary of all superintendents
employed by city, local, and exempted village school districts in this state with salaries greater than
$60,000 but less than $180,000 for the most recent fiscal year for which data is available, using fiscal
year 2018 data, as determined by the department.
         (10) "Average teacher cost" for a fiscal year is equal to the sum of the following:
         (a) The average salary of teachers employed by city, local, and exempted village school
districts in this state with salaries greater than $30,000 but less than $95,000 for the most recent fiscal
year for which data is available, using fiscal year 2018 data, as determined by the department;
         (b) An amount for teacher benefits equal to 0.16 times the average salary calculated under
division (A)(10)(a) of this section;
         (c) An amount for district-paid insurance costs equal to the following product:
     The statewide weighted average employer-paid monthly premium based on data
   reported by city, local, and exempted village school districts to the state employment
  relations board for the health insurance survey conducted in accordance with divisions
   (K)(5) and (6) of section 4117.02 of the Revised Code for the most recent fiscal year
                for which data is available using fiscal year 2018 data X 12
         (11) "Eligible school district" means a city, local, or exempted village school district that
satisfies one of the following:
         (a) The district is a member of an organization that regulates interscholastic athletics.
         (b) The district has teams in at least three different sports that participate in an interscholastic
league.
         (B) When calculating a district's aggregate base cost under this section, the department shall
use data from fiscal year 2018 for all of the following:
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                             134th G.A.
                                                    33
        (1) The average salaries determined under divisions (A)(1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (8), (9),
and (10)(a) of this section;
        (2) The amount for teacher benefits determined under division (A)(10)(b) of this section;
        (3) The district-paid insurance costs determined under division (A)(10)(c) of this section;
        (4) The spending determined under divisions (E)(4)(a), (E)(5)(a), (E)(6)(a), and (H)(1) of this
section and the corresponding student counts determined under divisions (E)(4)(b), (E)(5)(b), (E)(6)
(b), and (H)(2) of this section;
        (5) The information determined under division (G)(3) of this section.
        (C) A city, local, or exempted village school district's aggregate base cost for a fiscal year
shall be equal to the following sum:
 (The district's teacher base cost for that fiscal year computed under division (D) of this
   section) + (the district's student support base cost for that fiscal year computed under
  division (E) of this section) + (the district's leadership and accountability base cost for
    that fiscal year computed under division (F) of this section) + (the district's building
  leadership and operations base cost for that fiscal year computed under division (G) of
       this section) + (the athletic co-curricular activities base cost for that fiscal year
 computed under division (H) of this section, if the district is an eligible school district)
          (D) The department of education shall compute a district's teacher base cost for a fiscal year
as follows:
          (1) Calculate the district's classroom teacher cost for that fiscal year as follows:
          (a) Determine the full-time equivalency of students in the district's base cost enrolled ADM
for that fiscal year that are enrolled in kindergarten and divide that number by 20;
          (b) Determine the full-time equivalency of students in the district's base cost enrolled ADM
for that fiscal year that are enrolled in grades one through three and divide that number by 23;
          (c) Determine the full-time equivalency of students in the district's base cost enrolled ADM
for that fiscal year that are enrolled in grades four through eight but are not enrolled in a career-
technical education program or class described under section 3317.014 of the Revised Code and
divide that number by 25;
          (d) Determine the full-time equivalency of students in the district's base cost enrolled ADM
for that fiscal year that are enrolled in grades nine through twelve but are not enrolled in a career-
technical education program or class described under section 3317.014 of the Revised Code and
divide that number by 27;
          (e) Determine the full-time equivalency of students in the district's base cost enrolled ADM
for that fiscal year that are enrolled in a career-technical education program or class, as certified
under divisions (B)(11), (12), (13), (14), and (15) of section 3317.03 of the Revised Code, and divide
that number by 18;
          (f) Compute the sum of the quotients obtained under divisions (D)(1)(a), (b), (c), (d), and (e)
of this section;
          (g) Compute the classroom teacher cost by multiplying the average teacher cost for that fiscal
year by the sum computed under division (D)(1)(f) of this section.
          (2) Calculate the district's special teacher cost for that fiscal year as follows:
          (a) Divide the district's base cost enrolled ADM for that fiscal year by 150;
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                             134th G.A.
                                                    34
        (b) If the quotient obtained under division (D)(2)(a) of this section is greater than 6, the
special teacher cost shall be equal to that quotient multiplied by the average teacher cost for that
fiscal year.
        (c) If the quotient obtained under division (D)(2)(a) of this section is less than or equal to 6,
the special teacher cost shall be equal to 6 multiplied by the average teacher cost for that fiscal year.
        (3) Calculate the district's substitute teacher cost for that fiscal year in accordance with the
following formula:
        (a) Compute the substitute teacher daily rate with benefits by multiplying the substitute
teacher daily rate of $90 by 1.16;
        (b) Compute the substitute teacher cost in accordance with the following formula:
    [The sum computed under division (D)(1)(f) of this section + (the greater of the
     quotient obtained under division (D)(2)(a) of this section and 6)] X the amount
                 computed under division (D)(3)(a) of this section X 5
        (4) Calculate the district's professional development cost for that fiscal year in accordance
with the following formula:
     [The sum computed under division (D)(1)(f) of this section + (the greater of the
     quotient obtained under division (D)(2)(a) of this section and 6)] X [(the sum of
         divisions (A)(10)(a) and (b) of this section for that fiscal year)/180] X 4
        (5) Calculate the district's teacher base cost for that fiscal year, which equals the sum of
divisions (D)(1), (2), (3), and (4) of this section.
        (E) The department shall compute a district's student support base cost for a fiscal year as
follows:
        (1) Calculate the district's guidance counselor cost for that fiscal year as follows:
        (a) Determine the number of students in the district's base cost enrolled ADM for that fiscal
year that are enrolled in grades nine through twelve and divide that number by 360;
        (b) Compute the counselor cost in accordance with the following formula:
  (The greater of the quotient obtained under division (E)(1)(a) of this section and 1) X
 [(the average counselor salary for that fiscal year X 1.16) + the amount specified under
                  division (A)(10)(c) of this section for that fiscal year]
        (2) Calculate the district's librarian and media staff cost for that fiscal year as follows:
        (a) Divide the district's base cost enrolled ADM for that fiscal year by 1,000;
        (b) Compute the librarian and media staff cost in accordance with the following formula:
  The quotient obtained under division (E)(2)(a) of this section X [(the average librarian
 and media staff salary for that fiscal year X 1.16) + the amount specified under division
                      (A)(10)(c) of this section for that fiscal year]
        (3) Calculate the district's staffing cost for student wellness and success for that fiscal year as
follows:
        (a) Divide the district's base cost enrolled ADM for that fiscal year by 250;
        (b) Compute the staffing cost for student wellness and success in accordance with the
following formula:
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                           134th G.A.
                                                   35
  (The greater of the quotient obtained under division (E)(3)(a) of this section and 5) X
 [(the average counselor salary for that fiscal year X 1.16) + the amount specified under
                   division (A)(10)(c) of this section for that fiscal year]
         (4) Calculate the district's academic co-curricular activities cost for that fiscal year as
follows:
         (a) Determine the total amount of spending for academic co-curricular activities reported by
city, local, and exempted village school districts to the department for the most recent fiscal year for
which data is availableusing fiscal year 2018 data;
         (b) Determine the sum of the enrolled ADM of every school district in the state for the most
recent using fiscal year for which the 2018 data as specified under division (E)(4)(a) of this section
is available;
         (c) Compute the academic co-curricular activities cost in accordance with the following
formula:
  (The amount determined under division (E)(4)(a) of this section / the sum determined
 under division (E)(4)(b) of this section) X the district's base cost enrolled ADM for the
        fiscal year for which the academic co-curricular activities cost is computed
         (5) Calculate the district's building safety and security cost for that fiscal year as follows:
         (a) Determine the total amount of spending for building safety and security reported by city,
local, and exempted village school districts to the department for the most recent fiscal year for
which data is availableusing fiscal year 2018 data;
         (b) Determine the sum of the enrolled ADM of every school district in the state that reported
the data specified under division (E)(5)(a) of this section for the most recent fiscal year for which the
data is availableusing fiscal year 2018 data;
         (c) Compute the building safety and security cost in accordance with the following formula:
  (The amount determined under division (E)(5)(a) of this section / the sum determined
 under division (E)(5)(a) of this section) X the district's base cost enrolled ADM for the
           fiscal year for which the building safety and security cost is computed
         (6) Calculate the district's supplies and academic content cost for that fiscal year as follows:
         (a) Determine the total amount of spending for supplies and academic content, excluding
supplies for transportation and maintenance, reported by city, local, and exempted village school
districts to the department for the most recent fiscal year for which data is availableusing fiscal year
2018 data;
         (b) Determine the sum of the enrolled ADM of every school district in the state for the most
recent fiscal year for which the using fiscal year 2018 data as specified under division (E)(6)(a) of
this section is available;
         (c) Compute the supplies and academic content cost in accordance with the following
formula:
 (The amount determined under division (E)(6)(a) of this section / the sum determined
 under division (E)(6)(b) of this section) X the district's base cost enrolled ADM for the
       fiscal year for which the supplies and academic content cost is computed
       (7) Calculate the district's technology cost for that fiscal year in accordance with the
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                             134th G.A.
                                                    36
following formula:
              $37.50 X the district's base cost enrolled ADM for that fiscal year
         (8) Calculate the district's student support base cost for that fiscal year, which equals the sum
of divisions (E)(1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), and (7) of this section.
         (F) The department shall compute a district's leadership and accountability base cost for a
fiscal year as follows:
         (1) Calculate the district's superintendent cost for that fiscal year as follows:
         (a) If the district's base cost enrolled ADM for that fiscal year is greater than 4,000, then the
district's superintendent cost shall be equal to [($160,000 X 1.16) + the amount specified under
division (A)(10)(c) of this section for that fiscal year].
         (b) If the district's base cost enrolled ADM for that fiscal year is less than or equal to 4,000
but greater than or equal to 500, the district's superintendent cost shall be equal to the sum of the
following:
         (i) (The district's base cost enrolled ADM for that fiscal year - 500) X {[($160,000 X 1.16) -
($80,000 X 1.16)]/3500};
         (ii) ($80,000 X 1.16) + the amount specified under division (A)(10)(c) of this section for that
fiscal year.
         (c) If the district's base cost enrolled ADM is less than 500, then the district's superintendent
cost shall be equal to [($80,000 X 1.16) + the amount specified under division (A)(10)(c) of this
section for that fiscal year].
         (2) Calculate the district's treasurer cost for that fiscal year as follows:
         (a) If the district's base cost enrolled ADM for that fiscal year is greater than 4,000, then the
district's treasurer cost shall be equal to [($130,000 X 1.16) + the amount specified under division
(A)(10)(c) of this section for that fiscal year].
         (b) If the district's base cost enrolled ADM for that fiscal year is less than or equal to 4,000
but greater than or equal to 500, the district's treasurer cost shall be equal to the sum of the following:
         (i) (The district's base cost enrolled ADM for that fiscal year - 500) X {[($130,000 X 1.16) -
($60,000 X 1.16)]/3500};
         (ii) ($60,000 X 1.16) + the amount specified under division (A)(10)(c) of this section for that
fiscal year.
         (c) If the district's base cost enrolled ADM is less than 500, then the district's treasurer cost
shall be equal to [($60,000 X 1.16) + the amount specified under division (A)(10) (c) of this section
for that fiscal year].
         (3) Calculate the district's other district administrator cost for that fiscal year as follows:
         (a) Divide the average other district administrator salary for that fiscal year by the average
superintendent salary for that fiscal year;
         (b) Divide the district's base cost enrolled ADM for that fiscal year by 750;
         (c) Compute the other district administrator cost in accordance with the following formula:
 {[(The district's superintendent cost for that fiscal year calculated under division (F)(1)
  of this section - the amount specified under division (A)(10)(c) of this section for that
    fiscal year) X the quotient obtained under division (F)(3)(a) of this section] + the
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                              134th G.A.
                                                    37
    amount specified under division (A)(10)(c) of this section} X (the greater of the
            quotient obtained under division (F)(3)(b) of this section and 2)
      (4) Calculate the district's fiscal support cost for that fiscal year as follows:
      (a) Divide the district's base cost enrolled ADM for that fiscal year by 850;
      (b) Determine the lesser of the following:
      (i) The maximum of the quotient obtained under division (F)(4)(a) of this section and 2;
      (ii) 35.
      (c) Compute the fiscal support cost in accordance with the following formula:
       The number obtained under division (F)(4)(b) of this section X [(the average
  bookkeeping and accounting employee salary for that fiscal year X 1.16) + the amount
           specified under division (A)(10)(c) of this section for that fiscal year]
         (5) Calculate the district's education management information system support cost for that
fiscal year as follows:
         (a) Divide the district's base cost enrolled ADM for that fiscal year by 5,000;
         (b) Compute the education management information system support cost in accordance with
the following formula:
  (The greater of the quotient obtained under division (F)(5)(a) of this section and 1) X
  [(the average education management information system support employee salary for
 that fiscal year X 1.16) + the amount specified under division (A)(10)(c) of this section
                                       for that fiscal year]
         (6) Calculate the district's leadership support cost for that fiscal year as follows:
         (a) Determine the greater of the quotient obtained under division (F)(3)(b) of this section and
2, and add 1 to that number;
         (b) Divide the number obtained under division (F)(6)(a) of this section by 3;
         (c) Compute the leadership support cost in accordance with the following formula:
  (The greater of the quotient obtained under division (F)(6)(b) of this section and 1) X
  [(the average administrative assistant salary for that fiscal year X 1.16) + the amount
          specified under division (A)(10)(c) of this section for that fiscal year]
        (7) Calculate the district's information technology center support cost for that fiscal year in
accordance with the following formula:
              $31 X the district's base cost enrolled ADM for that fiscal year
         (8) Calculate the district's district leadership and accountability base cost for that fiscal year,
which equals the sum of divisions (F)(1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), and (7) of this section.
         (G) The department shall compute a district's building leadership and operations base cost for
a fiscal year as follows:
         (1) Calculate the district's building leadership cost for that fiscal year as follows:
         (a) Divide the average principal salary for that fiscal year by the average superintendent
salary for that fiscal year;
         (b) Divide the district's base cost enrolled ADM for that fiscal year by 450;
         (c) Compute the building leadership cost in accordance with the following formula:
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                             134th G.A.
                                                    38
 {[(The district's superintendent cost for that fiscal year calculated under division (F)(1)
  of this section - the amount specified under division (A)(10)(c) of this section for that
    fiscal year) X the quotient obtained under division (G)(1)(a) of this section] + the
   amount specified under division (A)(10)(c) of this section for that fiscal year} X the
                   quotient obtained under division (G)(1)(b) of this section
         (2) Calculate the district's building leadership support cost for that fiscal year as follows:
         (a) Divide the district's base cost enrolled ADM for that fiscal year by 400;
         (b) Determine the number of school buildings in the district for that fiscal year;
         (c) Compute the building leadership support cost in accordance with the following formula:
         (i) If the quotient obtained under division (G)(2)(a) of this section is less than the number
obtained under division (G)(2)(b) of this section, then the district's building leadership support cost
shall be equal to {the number obtained under division (G)(2)(b) of this section for that fiscal year X
[(the average clerical staff salary for that fiscal year X 1.16) + the amount specified under division
(A)(10)(c) of this section for that fiscal year]}.
         (ii) If the quotient obtained under division (G)(2)(a) of this section is greater than or equal to
the number obtained under division (G)(2)(b) of this section, then the district's building leadership
support cost shall be equal to {[the lesser of (the number obtained under division (G)(2)(b) of this
section X 3) and the quotient obtained under division (G)(2)(a) of this section] X [(the average
clerical staff salary for that fiscal year X 1.16) + the amount specified under division (A)(10)(c) of
this section for that fiscal year]}.
         (3) Calculate the district's building operations cost for that fiscal year as follows:
         (a) Using data for the six most recent fiscal years for which data is available, determine both
of the following:
         (i) The six-year average of the average building square feet per pupil for all city, local, and
exempted village school district buildings in the state;
         (ii) The six-year average cost per square foot for all city, local, and exempted village school
district buildings in the state.
         (b) Compute the building operations cost in accordance with the following formula:
         The district's base cost enrolled ADM for that fiscal year X [(the number determined under
division (G)(3)(a)(i) of this section X the number determined under division (G)(3)(a)(ii) of this
section) - (the amount determined under division (E)(6)(a) (E)(5)(a) of this section for that fiscal
year/ the sum determined under division (E)(6)(b) (E)(5)(b) of this section for that fiscal year)]
         (4) Calculate the district's building leadership and operations base cost for that fiscal year,
which equals the sum of divisions (G)(1), (2), and (3) of this section.
         (H) If a district is an eligible school district, the department shall compute the district's
athletic co-curricular activities base cost for a fiscal year as follows:
         (1) Determine the total amount of spending for athletic co-curricular activities reported by
city, local, and exempted village school districts to the department for that fiscal year;
         (2) Determine the sum of the enrolled ADM of every school district in the state for that fiscal
year;
         (3) Compute the district's athletic co-curricular activities base cost in accordance with the
following formula:
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                            134th G.A.
                                                   39
   (The amount determined under division (H)(1) of this section / the sum determined
   under division (H)(2) of this section) X the district's base cost enrolled ADM for the
     fiscal year for which the funds for athletic co-curricular activities are computed
         Sec. 3317.014. (A) The multiples for the following categories of career-technical education
programs approved by the department of education under section 3317.161 of the Revised Code shall
be as follows:
         (1) A multiple of 0.6230 for students enrolled in career-technical education workforce
development programs in agricultural and environmental systems, construction technologies,
engineering and science technologies, finance, health science, information technology, and
manufacturing technologies, each of which shall be defined by the department in consultation with
the governor's office of workforce transformation;
         (2) A multiple of 0.5905 for students enrolled in workforce development programs in
business and administration, hospitality and tourism, human services, law and public safety,
transportation systems, and arts and communications, each of which shall be defined by the
department in consultation with the governor's office of workforce transformation;
         (3) A multiple of 0.2154 for students enrolled in career-based intervention programs, which
shall be defined by the department in consultation with the governor's office of workforce
transformation;
         (4) A multiple of 0.1830 for students enrolled in workforce development programs in
education and training, marketing, workforce development academics, public administration, and
career development, each of which shall be defined by the department of education in consultation
with the governor's office of workforce transformation;
         (5) A multiple of 0.1570 for students enrolled in family and consumer science programs,
which shall be defined by the department of education in consultation with the governor's office of
workforce transformation.
         (B) The multiple for career-technical education associated services, as defined by the
department, shall be 0.0294.
         (C) The department of education shall calculate career-technical education funds for each
funding unit that is a city, local, exempted village, or joint vocational school district or the
community and STEM school unit as follows:
         (1) For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, the sum of the following:
         (a) The funding unit's category one career-technical education ADM X the multiple specified
in division (A)(1) of this section X the statewide average career-technical base cost per pupil for that
fiscal year X if the funding unit is a city, local, exempted village, or joint vocational school district,
the district's state share percentage;
         (b) The funding unit's category two career-technical education ADM X the multiple specified
in division (A)(2) of this section X the statewide average career-technical base cost per pupil for that
fiscal year X if the funding unit is a city, local, exempted village, or joint vocational school district,
the district's state share percentage;
         (c) The funding unit's category three career-technical education ADM X the multiple
specified in division (A)(3) of this section X the statewide average career-technical base cost per
pupil for that fiscal year X if the funding unit is a city, local, exempted village, or joint vocational
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                            134th G.A.
                                                   40
school district, the district's state share percentage;
         (d) The funding unit's category four career-technical education ADM X the multiple specified
in division (A)(4) of this section X the statewide average career-technical base cost per pupil for that
fiscal year X if the funding unit is a city, local, exempted village, or joint vocational school district,
the district's state share percentage;
         (e) The funding unit's category five career-technical education ADM X the multiple specified
in division (A)(5) of this section X the statewide average career-technical base cost per pupil for that
fiscal year X if the funding unit is a city, local, exempted village, or joint vocational school district,
the district's state share percentage.
         (2) For fiscal year 2024 and each fiscal year thereafter, the sum of the following:
         (a) An amount calculated in a manner determined by the general assembly times the funding
unit's category one career-technical education ADM;
         (b) An amount calculated in a manner determined by the general assembly times the funding
unit's category two career-technical education ADM;
         (c) An amount calculated in a manner determined by the general assembly times the funding
unit's category three career-technical education ADM;
         (d) An amount calculated in a manner determined by the general assembly times the funding
unit's category four career-technical education ADM;
         (e) An amount calculated in a manner determined by the general assembly times the funding
unit's category five career-technical education ADM.
         (3) Payment of funds calculated under division (C) of this section is subject to approval under
section 3317.161 of the Revised Code.
         (D) Subject to division (I) of section 3317.023 of the Revised Code, the department shall
calculate career-technical associated services funds for each funding unit that is a city, local,
exempted village, or joint vocational school district or the community and STEM school unit as
follows:
         (1) For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, the following product:
 (If the funding unit is a city, local, exempted village, or joint vocational school district,
  the funding unit's state share percentage) X the multiple for career-technical education
 associated services specified under division (B) of this section X the statewide average
  career-technical base cost per pupil for that fiscal year X the sum of the funding unit's
               categories one through five career-technical education ADM
         (2) For fiscal year 2024 and each fiscal year thereafter, an amount calculated in a manner
determined by the general assembly times the funding unit's categories one through five career-
technical education ADM.
         (E)(1) In accordance with division (I) of section 3317.023 of the Revised Code, the
department shall compute career awareness and exploration funds for each city, local, exempted
village, and joint vocational school district, community school established under Chapter 3314. of the
Revised Code, and STEM school established under Chapter 3326. of the Revised Code that is part of
a career technical planning district. The department shall pay the lead district in each career technical
planning district as follows:
         (a) For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, an amount equal to the following product:
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                             134th G.A.
                                                    41
    The sum of enrolled ADM for all districts and schools within the career technical
         planning district X $2.50, for fiscal year 2022, or $5, for fiscal year 2023
         (b) For fiscal year 2024 and each fiscal year thereafter, an amount calculated in a manner
determined by the general assembly, if the general assembly authorizes such a payment to city, local,
exempted village, and joint vocational school districts, community schools, and STEM schools.
         (2) The lead district of a career technical planning district shall use career awareness and
exploration funds in accordance with division (H) of this section.
         (F)(1) In any fiscal year, a school district receiving funds calculated under division (C) of this
section shall spend those funds only for the purposes that the department designates as approved for
career-technical education expenses. Career-technical education expenses approved by the
department shall include only expenses connected to the delivery of career-technical programming to
career-technical students. The department shall require the school district to report data annually so
that the department may monitor the district's compliance with the requirements regarding the
manner in which funding calculated under division (C) of this section may be spent.
         (2) All funds received under division (C) of this section shall be spent in the following
manner:
         (a) At least seventy-five per cent of the funds shall be spent on curriculum development,
purchase, and implementation; instructional resources and supplies; industry-based program
certification; student assessment, credentialing, and placement; curriculum specific equipment
purchases and leases; career-technical student organization fees and expenses; home and agency
linkages; work-based learning experiences; professional development; and other costs directly
associated with career-technical education programs including development of new programs.
         (b) Not more than twenty-five per cent of the funds shall be used for personnel expenditures.
         (G) In any fiscal year, a school district receiving funds calculated under division (D) of this
section, or through a transfer of funds pursuant to division (I) of section 3317.023 of the Revised
Code, shall spend those funds only for the purposes that the department designates as approved for
career-technical education associated services expenses, which may include such purposes as
apprenticeship coordinators, coordinators for other career-technical education services, career-
technical evaluation, and other purposes designated by the department. The department may deny
payment of funds calculated under division (D) of this section to any district that the department
determines is not operating those services or is using funds calculated under division (D) of this
section, or through a transfer of funds pursuant to division (I) of section 3317.023 of the Revised
Code, for other purposes.
         (H) In any fiscal year, a lead district of a career-technical planning district receiving funds
under division (E) of this section, shall utilize those funds to deliver relevant career awareness and
exploration programs to all students within its career technical planning district in a manner that is
consistent with the career-technical planning district's plan that is on file with the department of
education. The lead district that receives funds under this division shall spend those funds only for
the following purposes:
         (1) Delivery of career awareness programs to students enrolled in grades kindergarten
through twelve;
         (2) Provision of a common, consistent curriculum to students throughout their primary and
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                            134th G.A.
                                                   42
secondary education;
         (3) Assistance to teachers in providing a career development curriculum to students;
         (4) Development of a career development plan for each student that stays with that student
for the duration of the student's primary and secondary education;
         (5) Provision of opportunities for students to engage in activities, such as career fairs, hands-
on experiences, and job shadowing, across all career pathways at each grade level.
         The department may deny payment under this division to any district or school that the
department determines is using funds paid under this division for other purposes.
         Sec. 3317.016. The multiples for English learners shall be as follows:
         (A) A multiple of 0.2104 for each student who has been identified as an English learner
following the state's standardized identification process enrolled in schools in the United States for
180 school days or less and was not previously exempted from taking the spring administration of
either of the state's English language arts assessments prescribed by section 3301.0710 of the Revised
Code (reading or writing).
         (B) A multiple of 0.1577 for each student who, for fiscal years 2022 and 2023 has been
identified as an English learner following the state's standardized identification process and enrolled
in schools in the United States for more than 180 school days until the student achieves a proficient
score on the spring administration of either of the state's English language arts proficiency
assessments prescribed by division (C)(3)(b) of section 3301.0710 3301.0711 of the Revised Code
(reading or writing) that falls within the levels of achievement specified in divisions (A)(2)(a) to (c)
of that section or who, for fiscal year 2024 and each fiscal year thereafter, satisfies criteria specified
by the general assembly for purposes of this division.
         (C) A multiple of 0.1053 for each student who, for fiscal years 2022 and 2023, achieves a
score of proficient on the spring administration of either of the state's English language arts
proficiency assessments prescribed by division (C)(3)(b) of section 3301.0710 3301.0711 of the
Revised Code (reading or writing) that falls within the levels of achievement specified in divisions
(A)(2)(a) to (c) of that section, for the two school years following the school year in which the
student achieved that level of achievement or who, for fiscal year 2024 and each fiscal year
thereafter, satisfies criteria specified by the general assembly for purposes of this division.
         Sec. 3317.017. This section shall apply only for fiscal years 2022 and 2023.
         (A) The department of education shall compute a city, local, or exempted village school
district's per-pupil local capacity amount for a fiscal year as follows:
         (1) Calculate the district's valuation per pupil for that fiscal year as follows:
         (a) Determine the minimum of the district's three-year average valuation for the fiscal year
for which the calculation is made and the district's taxable value for the most recent tax year for
which data is available;
         (b) Divide the amount determined under division (A)(1)(a) of this section by the district's
base cost enrolled ADM for the fiscal year for which the calculation is made.
         (2) Calculate the district's local share federal adjusted gross income per pupil for that fiscal
year as follows:
         (a) Determine the minimum of the following:
         (i) The average of the total federal adjusted gross income of the district's residents for the
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                                134th G.A.
                                                     43
three most recent tax years for which data is available, as certified under section 3317.021 of the
Revised Code;
         (ii) The total federal adjusted gross income of the district's residents for the most recent tax
year for which data is available, as certified under section 3317.021 of the Revised Code.
         (b) Divide the amount determined under division (A)(2)(a) of this section by the district's
base cost enrolled ADM for the fiscal year for which the calculation is made.
         (3) Calculate the district's adjusted local share federal adjusted gross income per pupil for that
fiscal year as follows:
         (a) Determine both of the following:
         (i) The median federal adjusted gross income of the district's residents for the most recent tax
year for which data is available, as certified under section 3317.021 of the Revised Code;
         (ii) The number of state tax returns filed by taxpayers residing in the district for the most
recent tax year for which data is available, as certified under section 3317.021 of the Revised Code.
         (b) Compute the product of divisions (A)(3)(a)(i) and (ii) of this section;
         (c) Divide the amount determined under division (A)(3)(b) of this section by the district's
base cost enrolled ADM for the fiscal year for which the calculation is made.
         (4) Calculate the district's per-pupil local capacity percentage as follows:
         (a) Determine the median of the median federal adjusted gross incomes determined for all
districts statewide under division (A)(3)(a)(i) of this section for that fiscal year;
         (b) Divide the district's median federal adjusted gross income for that fiscal year determined
under division (A)(3)(a)(i) of this section by the median federal adjusted gross income for all districts
statewide determined under division (A)(4)(a) of this section;
         (c) Rank all school districts in order of the ratios calculated under division (A)(4)(b) of this
section, from the district with the highest ratio calculated under division (A)(4)(b) of this section to
the district with the lowest ratio calculated under division (A)(4)(b) of this section;
         (d) Determine the district's per-pupil local capacity percentage as follows:
         (i) If the ratio calculated for the district under division (A)(4)(b) of this section is greater than
or equal to the ratio calculated under division (A)(4)(b) of this section for the district with the fortieth
highest ratio as determined under division (A)(4)(c) of this section, the district's per-pupil local
capacity percentage shall be equal to 0.025.
         (ii) If the ratio calculated for the district under division (A)(4)(b) of this section is less than
the ratio calculated under division (A)(4)(b) of this section for the district with the fortieth highest
ratio as determined under division (A)(4)(c) of this section but greater than 1.0, the district's per-pupil
local capacity percentage shall be equal to an amount calculated as follows:
         {[(The ratio calculated for the district under division (A)(4)(b) of this section - 1) X 0.0025]/
(the ratio calculated under division (A)(4)(b) of this section for the district with the fortieth highest
ratio as determined under division (A)(4)(c) of this section – 1)} + 0.0225
         (iii) If the ratio calculated for the district under division (A)(4)(b) of this section is less than
or equal to 1.0, the district's per-pupil local capacity percentage shall be equal to the amount
calculated under division (A)(4)(b) of this section times 0.0225.
         (5) Calculate the district's per-pupil local capacity amount for that fiscal year as follows:
  (The district's valuation per pupil calculated under division (A)(1) of this section for
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                               134th G.A.
                                                     44
    that fiscal year X the district's per-pupil local capacity percentage calculated under
 division (A)(4) of this section X 0.60) + (the district's local share adjusted federal gross
  income per pupil calculated under division (A)(2) of this section for that fiscal year X
 the district's per-pupil local capacity percentage calculated under division (A)(4) of this
  section X 0.20) + (the district's adjusted local share federal adjusted gross income per
  pupil calculated under division (A)(3) of this section for that fiscal year X the district's
   per-pupil local capacity percentage calculated under division (A)(4) of this section X
                                               0.20)
         (B) The department shall compute a city, local, or exempted village school district's state
share for a fiscal year as follows:
         (1) If the district's per-pupil local capacity amount for that fiscal year divided by the district's
base cost per pupil for that fiscal year is greater than 0.95, then the district's state share shall be equal
to (the district's base cost per pupil for that fiscal year X 0.05 X the district's enrolled ADM for that
fiscal year).
         (2) If the district's per-pupil local capacity amount for that fiscal year divided by the district's
base cost per pupil for that fiscal year is less than or equal to 0.95, then the district's state share for
that fiscal year shall be equal to [(the district's base cost per pupil for that fiscal year - the district's
per-pupil local capacity amount for that fiscal year) X the district's enrolled ADM for that fiscal
year].
         (C) The department shall compute a city, local, or exempted village school district's state
share percentage for a fiscal year as follows:
    The district's state share calculated under division (B) of this section for that fiscal
 year/ the aggregate base cost calculated for the district for that fiscal year under section
  3317.011 of the Revised Code (the district's base cost per pupil amount for that fiscal
   year - the district's per pupil local capacity amount for that fiscal year)/(the district's
                        base cost per pupil amount for that fiscal year).
         If the result is less than 0.05, the state share percentage shall be 0.05.
       Sec. 3317.019. (A)(1) Subject to division (D) (C) of this section, for fiscal years 2022 and
2023, the department of education shall pay temporary transitional aid to each city, local, and
exempted village school district according to the following formula:
   (The district's funding base, as that term is defined in section 3317.02 of the Revised
     Code) – (the district's payment under section 3317.022 of the Revised Code - the
  district's payment for supplemental targeted assistance under section 3317.0218 of the
        Revised Code for the fiscal year for which the each payment is computed)
         If the computation made under division (A)(1) of this section results in a negative number,
the district's funding under division (A)(1) of this section shall be zero.
         (2) For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, the department shall pay temporary transitional
transportation aid to that district according to the following formula:
   (The amount calculated for the district for fiscal year 2020 under division (A)(2) of
    Section 265.220 of H.B. 166 of the 133rd general assembly, prior to any funding
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                              134th G.A.
                                                    45
     reductions authorized by Executive Order 2020-19D, "Implementing Additional
 Spending Controls to Balance the State Budget" issued on May 7, 2020) – (the district's
  payment for fiscal year 2019 under division (D)(2) of section 3314.091 of the Revised
  Code as that division existed prior to the effective date of this amendment September
 30, 2021) - (the district's payment under section 3317.0212 of the Revised Code for the
                       fiscal year for which the payment is computed)
         If the computation made under division (A)(2) of this section results in a negative number,
the district's funding under division (A)(2) of this section shall be zero.
         (B) If a local school district participates in the establishment of a joint vocational school
district that begins receiving payments under section 3317.16 of the Revised Code for fiscal year
2022 or fiscal year 2023, but does not receive payments for the fiscal year immediately preceding
that fiscal year, the department shall adjust, as necessary, the district's funding base, as that term is
defined in section 3317.02 of the Revised Code, according to the amounts received by the district in
the immediately preceding fiscal year for career-technical education students who attend the newly
established joint vocational school district.
         (C)(1) For purposes of division (C) of this section, a district's "decrease threshold" for a fiscal
year is the greater of the following:
         (a) Twenty;
         (b) Ten per cent of the number of the district's students counted under division (A)(1)(b) of
section 3317.03 of the Revised Code for the previous fiscal year.
         (2) For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, if a district has fewer students counted under division (A)
(1)(b) of section 3317.03 of the Revised Code for that fiscal year than for the previous fiscal year and
the positive difference between those two student counts is greater than or equal to the district's
decrease threshold for that fiscal year, the amount paid to the district under division (A) of this
section shall be reduced by the following amount:
    The statewide average base cost per pupil X [(the positive difference between the
 number of the district's students counted under division (A)(1)(b) of section 3317.03 of
  the Revised Code for that fiscal year and the number of the district's students counted
   under that division for the previous fiscal year) - the district's decrease threshold for
                                      that fiscal year]
        At no time, however, shall the amount paid to a district under division (A) of this section be
less than zero.
        Sec. 3317.0110. This section shall apply only for fiscal years 2022 and 2023.
        (A) As used in this section:
        (1) "Average teacher cost" for a fiscal year has the same meaning as in section 3317.011 of
the Revised Code.
        (2) "Eligible community or STEM school" means a community or STEM school that satisfies
one of the following:
        (a) The school is a member of an organization that regulates interscholastic athletics.
        (b) The school has teams in at least three different sports that participate in an interscholastic
league.
        (B) When calculating a community or STEM school's aggregate base cost under this section,
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                           134th G.A.
                                                   46
the department shall use data from fiscal year 2018 for the average teacher cost.
       (C) A community or STEM school's aggregate base cost for a fiscal year shall be equal to the
following sum:
  (The school's teacher base cost for that fiscal year computed under division (D) of this
    section) + (the school's student support base cost for that fiscal year computed under
   division (E) of this section) + (the school's leadership and accountability base cost for
    that fiscal year computed under division (F) of this section) + (the school's building
  leadership and operations base cost for that fiscal year computed under division (G) of
 this section) + (the school's athletic co-curricular activities base cost for that fiscal year
   computed under division (H) of this section, if the school is an eligible community or
                                         STEM school)
          (D) The department of education shall compute a community or STEM school's teacher base
cost for a fiscal year as follows:
          (1) Calculate the school's classroom teacher cost for that fiscal year as follows:
          (a) Determine the full-time equivalency of students enrolled in the school for that fiscal year
that are enrolled in kindergarten and divide that number by 20;
          (b) Determine the full-time equivalency of students enrolled in the school for that fiscal year
that are enrolled in grades one through three and divide that number by 23;
          (c) Determine the full-time equivalency of students enrolled in the school for that fiscal year
that are enrolled in grades four through eight but are not enrolled in a career-technical education
program or class described under section 3317.014 of the Revised Code and divide that number by
25;
          (d) Determine the full-time equivalency of students enrolled in the school for that fiscal year
that are enrolled in grades nine through twelve but are not enrolled in a career-technical education
program or class described under section 3317.014 of the Revised Code and divide that number by
27;
          (e) Determine the full-time equivalency of students enrolled in the school for that fiscal year
that are enrolled in a career-technical education program or class, as reported under division (B)(2)
(d) (B)(4) of section 3314.08 of the Revised Code, and divide that number by 18;
          (f) Compute the sum of the quotients obtained under divisions (D)(1)(a), (b), (c), (d), and (e)
of this section;
          (g) Compute the classroom teacher cost by multiplying the average teacher cost for that fiscal
year by the sum computed under division (D)(1)(f) of this section.
          (2) Calculate the school's special teacher cost for that fiscal year as follows:
          (a) Divide the number of students enrolled in the school for that fiscal year by 150;
          (b) Compute the special teacher cost by multiplying the quotient obtained under division (D)
(2)(a) of this section by the average teacher cost for that fiscal year.
          (3) Calculate the school's substitute teacher cost for that fiscal year in accordance with the
following formula:
          (a) Compute the substitute teacher daily rate with benefits by multiplying the substitute
teacher daily rate of $90 by 1.16;
          (b) Compute the substitute teacher cost in accordance with the following formula:
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                             134th G.A.
                                                    47
   (The sum computed under division (D)(1)(f) of this section + the quotient obtained
 under division (D)(2)(a) of this section) X the amount computed under division (D)(3)
                                  (a) of this section X 5
        (4) Calculate the school's professional development cost for that fiscal year in accordance
with the following formula:
   (The sum computed under division (D)(1)(f) of this section + the quotient obtained
  under division (D)(2)(a) of this section) X [(the sum of divisions (A)(10)(a) and (b) of
            section 3317.011 of the Revised Code for that fiscal year)/180] X 4
         (5) Calculate the school's teacher base cost for that fiscal year, which equals the sum of
divisions (D)(1), (2), (3), and (4) of this section.
         (E) The department shall compute a community or STEM school's student support base cost
for a fiscal year as follows:
  The number of students enrolled in the school for that fiscal year X [(the sum of the
   student support base cost calculated for all city, local, and exempted village school
  districts in the state for that fiscal year under division (E) of section 3317.011 of the
  Revised Code) / the sum of the base cost enrolled ADMs of all of the city, local, and
             exempted village school districts in the state for that fiscal year]
        (F) The department shall compute a community or STEM school's leadership and
accountability base cost for a fiscal year as follows:
   The number of students enrolled in the school for that fiscal year X (the sum of the
   leadership and accountability base cost calculated for all city, local, and exempted
   village school districts in the state for that fiscal year under division (F) of section
  3317.011 of the Revised Code / the sum of the base cost enrolled ADMs of all of the
    city, local, and exempted village school districts in the state for that fiscal year)
        (G) The department shall compute a community or STEM school's building leadership and
operations base cost for a fiscal year as follows:
   The number of students enrolled in the school for that fiscal year X (the sum of the
     building leadership and accountability base cost calculated for all city, local, and
  exempted village school districts in the state for that fiscal year under division (G) of
  section 3317.011 of the Revised Code / the sum of the base cost enrolled ADMs of all
  of the city, local, and exempted village school districts in the state for that fiscal year)
         (H) If a community or STEM school is an eligible community or STEM school, the
department shall compute the school's athletic co-curricular activities base cost for a fiscal year as
follows:
   The number of students enrolled in the school for that fiscal year X (the sum of the
   athletic co-curricular activities base cost calculated for all city, local, and exempted
   village school districts in the state for that fiscal year under division (H) of section
  3317.011 of the Revised Code / the sum of the base cost enrolled ADMs of all of the
  city, local, and exempted village school districts in the state for that fiscal year) (the
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                             134th G.A.
                                                    48
 amount determined under division (H)(1) of section 3317.011 of the Revised Code / the
     sum determined under division (H)(2) of section 3317.011 of the Revised Code)
          Sec. 3317.02. As used in this chapter:
          (A) "Alternative school" has the same meaning as in section 3313.974 of the Revised Code.
          (B) "Autism scholarship unit" means a unit that consists of all of the students for whom
autism scholarships are awarded under section 3310.41 of the Revised Code.
          (C) For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, a district's "base cost enrolled ADM" for a fiscal year
means the greater of the following:
          (1) The district's enrolled ADM for the previous fiscal year;
          (2) The average of the district's enrolled ADM for the previous three fiscal years.
          (D)(1) "Base cost per pupil" means the following for a city, local, or exempted village school
district:
          (a) For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, the aggregate base cost calculated for that district for that
fiscal year under section 3317.011 of the Revised Code divided by the district's base cost enrolled
ADM for that fiscal year;
          (b) For fiscal year 2024 and each fiscal year thereafter, an amount calculated in a manner
determined by the general assembly.
          (2) "Base cost per pupil" means the following for a joint vocational school district:
          (a) For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, the aggregate base cost calculated for that district for that
fiscal year under section 3317.012 of the Revised Code divided by the district's base cost enrolled
ADM for that fiscal year;
          (b) For fiscal year 2024 and each fiscal year thereafter, an amount calculated in a manner
determined by the general assembly.
          (E)(1) "Category one career-technical education ADM" means the enrollment of students
during the school year on a full-time equivalency basis in career-technical education programs
described in division (A)(1) of section 3317.014 of the Revised Code and, in the case of a funding
unit that is a city, local, exempted village, or joint vocational school district, certified under division
(B)(11) or (D)(2)(h) of section 3317.03 of the Revised Code or, in the case of the community and
STEM school unit, reported by all community and STEM schools statewide under divisions (B)(4)
and (5) of section 3314.08 of the Revised Code and division (D) of section 3326.32 of the Revised
Code.
          (2) "Category two career-technical education ADM" means the enrollment of students during
the school year on a full-time equivalency basis in career-technical education programs described in
division (A)(2) of section 3317.014 of the Revised Code and, in the case of a funding unit that is a
city, local, exempted village, or joint vocational school district, certified under division (B)(12) or
(D)(2)(i) of section 3317.03 of the Revised Code or, in the case of the community and STEM school
unit, reported by all community and STEM schools statewide under divisions (B)(4) and (5) of
section 3314.08 of the Revised Code and division (D) of section 3326.32 of the Revised Code.
          (3) "Category three career-technical education ADM" means the enrollment of students
during the school year on a full-time equivalency basis in career-technical education programs
described in division (A)(3) of section 3317.014 of the Revised Code and, in the case of a funding
unit that is a city, local, exempted village, or joint vocational school district, certified under division
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                            134th G.A.
                                                   49
(B)(13) or (D)(2)(j) of section 3317.03 of the Revised Code or, in the case of the community and
STEM school unit, reported by all community and STEM schools statewide under divisions (B)(4)
and (5) of section 3314.08 of the Revised Code and division (D) of section 3326.32 of the Revised
Code.
         (4) "Category four career-technical education ADM" means the enrollment of students during
the school year on a full-time equivalency basis in career-technical education programs described in
division (A)(4) of section 3317.014 of the Revised Code and, in the case of a funding unit that is a
city, local, exempted village, or joint vocational school district, certified under division (B)(14) or
(D)(2)(k) of section 3317.03 of the Revised Code or, in the case of the community and STEM school
unit, reported by all community and STEM schools statewide under divisions (B)(4) and (5) of
section 3314.08 of the Revised Code and division (D) of section 3326.32 of the Revised Code.
         (5) "Category five career-technical education ADM" means the enrollment of students during
the school year on a full-time equivalency basis in career-technical education programs described in
division (A)(5) of section 3317.014 of the Revised Code and, in the case of a funding unit that is a
city, local, exempted village, or joint vocational school district, certified under division (B)(15) or
(D)(2)(l) of section 3317.03 of the Revised Code or, in the case of the community and STEM school
unit, reported by all community and STEM schools statewide under divisions (B)(4) and (5) of
section 3314.08 of the Revised Code and division (D) of section 3326.32 of the Revised Code.
         (F)(1) "Category one English learner ADM" means the full-time equivalent number of
English learners described in division (A) of section 3317.016 of the Revised Code and, in the case
of a funding unit that is a city, local, exempted village, or joint vocational school district, certified
under division (B)(16) or (D)(2)(m) of section 3317.03 of the Revised Code or, in the case of the
community and STEM school unit, reported by all community and STEM schools statewide under
division (B)(6) of section 3314.08 of the Revised Code and division (E) of section 3326.32 of the
Revised Code.
         (2) "Category two English learner ADM" means the full-time equivalent number of English
learners described in division (B) of section 3317.016 of the Revised Code and, in the case of a
funding unit that is a city, local, exempted village, or joint vocational school district, certified under
division (B)(17) or (D)(2)(n) of section 3317.03 of the Revised Code or, in the case of the community
and STEM school unit, reported by all community and STEM schools statewide under division (B)
(6) of section 3314.08 of the Revised Code and division (E) of section 3326.32 of the Revised Code.
         (3) "Category three English learner ADM" means the full-time equivalent number of English
learners described in division (C) of section 3317.016 of the Revised Code and, in the case of a
funding unit that is a city, local, exempted village, or joint vocational school district, certified under
division (B)(18) or (D)(2)(o) of section 3317.03 of the Revised Code or, in the case of the community
and STEM school unit, reported by all community and STEM schools statewide under division (B)
(6) of section 3314.08 of the Revised Code and division (E) of section 3326.32 of the Revised Code.
         (G)(1) "Category one special education ADM" means the full-time equivalent number of
children with disabilities receiving special education services for the disability specified in division
(A) of section 3317.013 of the Revised Code and, in the case of a funding unit that is a city, local,
exempted village, or joint vocational school district, certified under division (B)(5) or (D)(2)(b) of
section 3317.03 of the Revised Code or, in the case of the community and STEM school unit,
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                            134th G.A.
                                                   50
reported by all community and STEM schools statewide under division (B)(3) of section 3314.08 of
the Revised Code and division (C) of section 3326.32 of the Revised Code.
        (2) "Category two special education ADM" means the full-time equivalent number of
children with disabilities receiving special education services for those disabilities specified in
division (B) of section 3317.013 of the Revised Code and, in the case of a funding unit that is a city,
local, exempted village, or joint vocational school district, certified under division (B)(6) or (D)(2)(c)
of section 3317.03 of the Revised Code or, in the case of the community and STEM school unit,
reported by all community and STEM schools statewide under division (B)(3) of section 3314.08 of
the Revised Code and division (C) of section 3326.32 of the Revised Code.
        (3) "Category three special education ADM" means the full-time equivalent number of
students receiving special education services for those disabilities specified in division (C) of section
3317.013 of the Revised Code, and, in the case of a funding unit that is a city, local, exempted
village, or joint vocational school district, certified under division (B)(7) or (D)(2)(d) of section
3317.03 of the Revised Code or, in the case of the community and STEM school unit, reported by all
community and STEM schools statewide under division (B)(3) of section 3314.08 of the Revised
Code and division (C) of section 3326.32 of the Revised Code.
        (4) "Category four special education ADM" means the full-time equivalent number of
students receiving special education services for those disabilities specified in division (D) of section
3317.013 of the Revised Code and, in the case of a funding unit that is a city, local, exempted village,
or joint vocational school district, certified under division (B)(8) or (D)(2)(e) of section 3317.03 of
the Revised Code or, in the case of the community and STEM school unit, reported by all community
and STEM schools statewide under division (B)(3) of section 3314.08 of the Revised Code and
division (C) of section 3326.32 of the Revised Code.
        (5) "Category five special education ADM" means the full-time equivalent number of
students receiving special education services for the disabilities specified in division (E) of section
3317.013 of the Revised Code and, in the case of a funding unit that is a city, local, exempted village,
or joint vocational school district, certified under division (B)(9) or (D)(2)(f) of section 3317.03 of
the Revised Code or, in the case of the community and STEM school unit, reported by all community
and STEM schools statewide under division (B)(3) of section 3314.08 of the Revised Code and
division (C) of section 3326.32 of the Revised Code.
        (6) "Category six special education ADM" means the full-time equivalent number of students
receiving special education services for the disabilities specified in division (F) of section 3317.013
of the Revised Code and, in the case of a funding unit that is a city, local, exempted village, or joint
vocational school district certified under division (B)(10) or (D)(2)(g) of section 3317.03 of the
Revised Code or, in the case of the community and STEM school unit, reported by all community
and STEM schools statewide under division (B)(3) of section 3314.08 of the Revised Code and
division (C) of section 3326.32 of the Revised Code.
        (H) "Community and STEM school unit" means a unit that consists of all of the students
enrolled in community schools established under Chapter 3314. of the Revised Code and science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics schools established under Chapter 3326. of the Revised
Code.
        (I)(1) "Economically disadvantaged index for a school district" means the following:
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                            134th G.A.
                                                   51
         (a) For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, the square of the quotient of that district's percentage of
students in its enrolled ADM who are identified as economically disadvantaged as defined by the
department of education, divided by the percentage of students in the statewide ADM identified as
economically disadvantaged. For purposes of this calculation:
         (i) For a city, local, or exempted village school district, the "statewide ADM" equals the sum
of the following:
         (I) The enrolled ADM for all city, local, and exempted village school districts combined;
         (II) The statewide enrollment of students in community schools established under Chapter
3314. of the Revised Code;
         (III) The statewide enrollment of students in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics schools established under Chapter 3326. of the Revised Code.
         (ii) For a joint vocational school district, the "statewide ADM" equals the sum of the enrolled
ADM for all joint vocational school districts combined.
         (b) For fiscal year 2024 and each fiscal year thereafter, an index calculated in a manner
determined by the general assembly.
         (2) "Economically disadvantaged index for a community or STEM school" means the
following:
         (a) For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, the square of the quotient of the percentage of students
enrolled in the school who are identified as economically disadvantaged as defined by the department
of education, divided by the percentage of students in the statewide ADM identified as economically
disadvantaged. For purposes of this calculation, the "statewide ADM" equals the "statewide ADM"
for city, local, and exempted village school districts described in division (I)(1)(a)(i) of this section.
         (b) For fiscal year 2024 and each fiscal year thereafter, an index calculated in a manner
determined by the general assembly.
         (J) "Educational choice scholarship unit" means a unit that consists of all of the students for
whom educational choice scholarships are awarded under sections 3310.03 and 3310.032 of the
Revised Code.
         (K) "Enrolled ADM" means the following:
         (1) For a city, local, or exempted village school district, the enrollment reported under
division (A) of section 3317.03 of the Revised Code, as verified by the superintendent of public
instruction and adjusted if so ordered under division (K) of that section, and as further adjusted by
the department of education, as follows:
         (a) Add the students described in division (A)(1)(b) of section 3317.03 of the Revised Code;
         (b) Subtract the students counted under divisions (A)(2)(a), (b), (d), (g), (h), (i), and (j) of
section 3317.03 of the Revised Code;
         (c) Count only twenty per cent of the number of joint vocational school district students
counted under division (A)(3) of section 3317.03 of the Revised Code;
         (d) Add twenty per cent of the number of students who are entitled to attend school in the
district under section 3313.64 or 3313.65 of the Revised Code and are enrolled in another school
district under a career-technical education compact;
         (e) Add twenty per cent of the number of students described in division (A)(1)(b) of section
3317.03 of the Revised Code who enroll in a joint vocational school district or under a career-
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                          134th G.A.
                                                  52
technical education compact.
         (2) For a joint vocational school district, the final number verified by the superintendent of
public instruction, based on the enrollment reported and certified under division (D) of section
3317.03 of the Revised Code, as adjusted, if so ordered, under division (K) of that section, and as
further adjusted by the department of education by adding the students described in division (D)(1)
(b) of section 3317.03 of the Revised Code;
         (3) For the community and STEM school unit, the sum of the number of students reported as
enrolled in community schools under divisions (B)(1) and (2) of section 3314.08 of the Revised Code
and the number of students reported as enrolled in STEM schools under division (A) of section
3326.32 of the Revised Code;
         (4) For the educational choice scholarship unit, the number of students for whom educational
choice scholarships are awarded under sections 3310.03 and 3310.032 of the Revised Code as
reported under division (A)(2)(g) of section 3317.03 of the Revised Code;
         (5) For the pilot project scholarship unit, the number of students for whom pilot project
scholarships are awarded under sections 3313.974 to 3313.979 of the Revised Code as reported under
division (A)(2)(b) of section 3317.03 of the Revised Code;
         (6) For the autism scholarship unit, the number of students for whom autism scholarships are
awarded under section 3310.41 of the Revised Code as reported under division (A)(2)(h) of section
3317.03 of the Revised Code;
         (7) For the Jon Peterson special needs scholarship unit, the number of students for whom Jon
Peterson special needs scholarships are awarded under sections 3310.51 to 3310.64 of the Revised
Code as reported under division (A)(2)(h) of section 3317.03 of the Revised Code.
         (L)(1) "Formula ADM" means, for a city, local, or exempted village school district, the
enrollment reported under division (A) of section 3317.03 of the Revised Code, as verified by the
superintendent of public instruction and adjusted if so ordered under division (K) of that section, and
as further adjusted by the department of education, as follows:
         (a) Count only twenty per cent of the number of joint vocational school district students
counted under division (A)(3) of section 3317.03 of the Revised Code;
         (b) Add twenty per cent of the number of students who are entitled to attend school in the
district under section 3313.64 or 3313.65 of the Revised Code and are enrolled in another school
district under a career-technical education compact.
         (2) "Formula ADM" means, for a joint vocational school district, the final number verified by
the superintendent of public instruction, based on the enrollment reported and certified under division
(D) of section 3317.03 of the Revised Code, as adjusted, if so ordered, under division (K) of that
section.
         (M) "FTE basis" means a count of students based on full-time equivalency, in accordance
with rules adopted by the department of education pursuant to section 3317.03 of the Revised Code.
In adopting its rules under this division, the department shall provide for counting any student in
category one, two, three, four, five, or six special education ADM or in category one, two, three, four,
or five career-technical education ADM in the same proportion the student is counted in enrolled
ADM and formula ADM.
         (N) For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, "funding base" means, for a city, local, or exempted
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                           134th G.A.
                                                   53
village school district, the sum of the following as calculated by the department:
         (1) The district's "general funding base," which equals the amount calculated as follows:
         (a) Compute the sum of the following:
         (i) The amount calculated for the district for fiscal year 2020 under division (A)(1) of Section
265.220 of H.B. 166 of the 133rd general assembly after any adjustments required under Section
265.227 of H.B. 166 of the 133rd general assembly and prior to any funding reductions authorized by
Executive Order 2020-19D, "Implementing Additional Spending Controls to Balance the State
Budget" issued on May 7, 2020;
         (ii) The Either of the following:
         (I) For fiscal year 2022, the district's payments for fiscal year 2020 under divisions (C)(1),
(2), (3), and (4) of section 3313.981 of the Revised Code as those divisions existed prior to the
effective date of this amendment September 30, 2021;
         (II) For fiscal year 2023, the district's payments for fiscal year 2020 under divisions (C)(1),
(3), and (4) of section 3313.981 of the Revised Code as those divisions existed prior to September
30, 2021.
         (b) Subtract from the amount calculated in division (J)(1) (N)(1)(a) of this section the sum of
the following:
         (i) The following difference:
     (The amount paid to the district under division (A)(5) of section 3317.022 of the
   Revised Code, as that division existed prior to the effective date of this amendment
 September 30, 2021, for fiscal year 2019) - (the amounts deducted from the district and
 paid to a community school under division (C)(1)(e) of section 3314.08 of the Revised
 Code or a science, technology, engineering, and mathematics school under division (E)
 of section 3326.33 of the Revised Code as those divisions existed prior to the effective
   date of this amendment September 30, 2021, for fiscal year 2020 in accordance with
       division (A) of Section 265.235 of H.B. 166 of the 133rd general assembly)
         (ii) The payments deducted from the district and paid to a community school for fiscal year
2020 under divisions (C)(1)(a), (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), and (g) of section 3314.08 of the Revised Code
as those divisions existed prior to the effective date of this amendment September 30, 2021, in
accordance with division (A) of Section 265.230 of H.B. 166 of the 133rd general assembly;
         (iii) The payments deducted from the district and paid to a science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics school for fiscal year 2020 under divisions (A), (B), (C), (D), (E), (F), and (G) of
section 3326.33 of the Revised Code as those divisions existed prior to the effective date of this
amendment September 30, 2021, in accordance with division (A) of Section 265.235 of H.B. 166 of
the 133rd general assembly;
         (iv) The payments deducted from the district under division (C) of section 3310.08 of the
Revised Code as that division existed prior to the effective date of this amendment September 30,
2021, division (C)(2) of section 3310.41 of the Revised Code as that division existed prior to the
effective date of this amendment September 30, 2021, and former section 3310.55 of the Revised
Code for fiscal year 2020 and, in the case of a pilot project school district as defined in section
3313.975 of the Revised Code, the funds deducted from the district under Section 265.210 of H.B.
166 of the 133rd general assembly to operate the pilot project scholarship program for fiscal year
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                          134th G.A.
                                                  54
2020 under sections 3313.974 to 3313.979 of the Revised Code;
         (v) The Either of the following:
         (I) For fiscal year 2022, the payments subtracted from the district for fiscal year 2020 under
divisions (B)(1), (2), and (3) of section 3313.981 of the Revised Code as those divisions existed prior
to the effective date of this amendment September 30, 2021;
         (II) For fiscal year 2023, the payments subtracted from the district for fiscal year 2020 under
divisions (B)(1) and (3) of section 3313.981 of the Revised Code as those divisions existed prior to
September 30, 2021.
         (2) The district's "disadvantaged pupil impact aid funding base," which equals the following
difference:
     (The amount paid to the district under division (A)(5) of section 3317.022 of the
   Revised Code, as that division existed prior to the effective date of this amendment
 September 30, 2021, for fiscal year 2019) - (the amounts deducted from the district and
 paid to a community school under division (C)(1)(e) of section 3314.08 of the Revised
 Code or a science, technology, engineering, and mathematics school under division (E)
 of section 3326.33 of the Revised Code as those divisions existed prior to the effective
   date of this amendment September 30, 2021, for fiscal year 2020 in accordance with
       division (A) of Section 265.235 of H.B. 166 of the 133rd general assembly)
         (O) For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, "funding base" means, for a joint vocational school
district, the sum of the following as calculated by the department:
         (1) The district's "general funding base," which equals the amount calculated as follows:
         (a) Compute the sum of the following:
         (i) The district's payments for fiscal year 2020 under Section 265.225 of H.B. 166 of the
133rd general assembly after any adjustments required under Section 265.227 of H.B. 166 of the
133rd general assembly;
         (ii) The Either of the following:
         (I) For fiscal year 2022, the district's payments for fiscal year 2020 under divisions (D)(1),
(2), and (E)(3) of section 3313.981 of the Revised Code as those divisions existed prior to the
effective date of this amendment September 30, 2021;
         (II) For fiscal year 2023, the district's payments for fiscal year 2020 under divisions (D)(1)
and (2) of section 3313.981 of the Revised Code as those divisions existed prior to September 30,
2021.
         (b) Subtract from the amount paid to the district under division (A)(3) of section 3317.16 of
the Revised Code, as that division existed prior to the effective date of this amendment September
30, 2021, for fiscal year 2019.
         (2) The district's "disadvantaged pupil impact aid funding base," which equals the amount
paid to the district under division (A)(3) of section 3317.16 of the Revised Code, as that division
existed prior to the effective date of this amendment September 30, 2021, for fiscal year 2019.
         (P) For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, "funding base" for a community school means the
following:
         (1) For a community school that was in operation for the entirety of fiscal year 2020, the
amount paid to the school for that fiscal year under division (C)(1) of section 3314.08 of the Revised
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                            134th G.A.
                                                   55
Code as that division existed prior to the effective date of this amendment September 30, 2021, in
accordance with division (A) of Section 265.230 of H.B. 166 of the 133rd general assembly and the
amount, if any, paid to the school for that fiscal year under section 3314.085 of the Revised Code in
accordance with division (B) of Section 265.230 of H.B. 166 of the 133rd general assembly;
         (2) For a community school that was in operation for part of fiscal year 2020, the amount that
would have been paid to the school for that fiscal year under division (C)(1) of section 3314.08 of the
Revised Code as that division existed prior to the effective date of this amendment September 30,
2021, in accordance with division (A) of Section 265.230 of H.B. 166 of the 133rd general assembly
if the school had been in operation for the entirety of that fiscal year, as calculated by the department,
and the amount that would have been paid to the school for that fiscal year under section 3314.085 of
the Revised Code in accordance with division (B) of Section 265.230 of H.B. 166 of the 133rd
general assembly, if any, if the school had been in operation for the entirety of that fiscal year, as
calculated by the department;
         (3) For a community school that was not in operation for fiscal year 2020, the amount that
would have been paid to the school if it was in operation for that school year under division (C)(1) of
section 3314.08 of the Revised Code as that division existed prior to the effective date of this
amendment September 30, 2021, in accordance with division (A) of Section 265.230 of H.B. 166 of
the 133rd general assembly if the school had been in operation for the entirety of that fiscal year, as
calculated by the department, and the amount that would have been paid to the school for that fiscal
year under section 3314.085 of the Revised Code in accordance with division (B) of Section 265.230
of H.B. 166 of the 133rd general assembly, if any, if the school had been in operation for the entirety
of that fiscal year, as calculated by the department.
         (Q) For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, "funding base" for a STEM school means the following:
         (1) For a science, technology, engineering, and mathematics school that was in operation for
the entirety of fiscal year 2020, the amount paid to the school for that fiscal year under section
3326.33 of the Revised Code as that section existed prior to the effective date of this amendment
September 30, 2021, in accordance with division (A) of Section 265.235 of H.B. 166 of the 133rd
general assembly and the amount, if any, paid to the school for that fiscal year under section 3326.41
of the Revised Code in accordance with division (B) of Section 265.235 of H.B. 166 of the 133rd
general assembly;
         (2) For a science, technology, engineering, and mathematics school that was in operation for
part of fiscal year 2020, the amount that would have been paid to the school for that fiscal year under
section 3326.33 of the Revised Code as that section existed prior to the effective date of this
amendment September 30, 2021, in accordance with division (A) of Section 265.235 of H.B. 166 of
the 133rd general assembly if the school had been in operation for the entirety of that fiscal year, as
calculated by the department, and the amount that would have been paid to the school for that fiscal
year under section 3326.41 of the Revised Code in accordance with division (B) of Section 265.235
of H.B. 166 of the 133rd general assembly, if any, if the school had been in operation for the entirety
of that fiscal year, as calculated by the department;
         (3) For a science, technology, engineering, and mathematics school that was not in operation
for fiscal year 2020, the amount that would have been paid to the school if it was in operation for that
school year under section 3326.33 of the Revised Code as that section existed prior to the effective
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                           134th G.A.
                                                   56
date of this amendment September 30, 2021, in accordance with division (A) of Section 265.235 of
H.B. 166 of the 133rd general assembly if the school had been in operation for the entirety of that
fiscal year, as calculated by the department, and the amount that would have been paid to the school
for that fiscal year under section 3326.41 of the Revised Code in accordance with division (B) of
Section 265.235 of H.B. 166 of the 133rd general assembly, if any, if the school had been in
operation for the entirety of that fiscal year, as calculated by the department.
         (R) "Funding unit" means any of the following:
         (1) A city, local, exempted village, or joint vocational school district;
         (2) The community and STEM school unit;
         (3) The educational choice scholarship unit;
         (4) The pilot project scholarship unit;
         (5) The autism scholarship unit;
         (6) The Jon Peterson special needs scholarship unit.
         (S) "Jon Peterson special needs scholarship unit" means a unit that consists of all of the
students for whom Jon Peterson scholarships are awarded under sections 3310.51 to 3310.64 of the
Revised Code.
         (T) "Internet- or computer-based community school" has the same meaning as in section
3314.02 of the Revised Code.
         (U) "LRE student with a disability" means a child with a disability who has an individualized
education program providing for the student to spend more than half of each school day in a regular
school setting with nondisabled students. For purposes of this division, "individualized education
program" and "child with a disability" have the same meanings as in section 3323.01 of the Revised
Code, and "LRE" is an abbreviation for "least restrictive environment."
         (V) "Medically fragile child" means a child to whom all of the following apply:
         (1) The child requires the services of a doctor of medicine or osteopathic medicine at least
once a week due to the instability of the child's medical condition.
         (2) The child requires the services of a registered nurse on a daily basis.
         (3) The child is at risk of institutionalization in a hospital, skilled nursing facility, or
intermediate care facility for individuals with intellectual disabilities.
         (W)(1) A child may be identified as having an "other health impairment-major" if the child's
condition meets the definition of "other health impaired" established in rules previously adopted by
the state board of education and if either of the following apply:
         (a) The child is identified as having a medical condition that is among those listed by the
superintendent of public instruction as conditions where a substantial majority of cases fall within the
definition of "medically fragile child."
         (b) The child is determined by the superintendent of public instruction to be a medically
fragile child. A school district superintendent may petition the superintendent of public instruction for
a determination that a child is a medically fragile child.
         (2) A child may be identified as having an "other health impairment-minor" if the child's
condition meets the definition of "other health impaired" established in rules previously adopted by
the state board of education but the child's condition does not meet either of the conditions specified
in division (W)(1)(a) or (b) of this section.
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                             134th G.A.
                                                   57
         (X)(1) For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, a city, local, exempted village, or joint vocational
school district's, community school's, or STEM school's "general phase-in percentage" is equal to the
percentage for that fiscal year that is determined by the general assembly.
         (2) For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, a city, local, exempted village, or joint vocational school
district's "phase-in percentage for disadvantaged pupil impact aid" is equal to the percentage for that
fiscal year that is determined by the general assembly.
         (Y) "Pilot project scholarship unit" means a unit that consists of all of the students for whom
pilot project scholarships are awarded under sections 3313.974 to 3313.979 of the Revised Code.
         (Z) "Preschool child with a disability" means a child with a disability, as defined in section
3323.01 of the Revised Code, who is at least age three but is not of compulsory school age, as
defined in section 3321.01 of the Revised Code, and who is not currently enrolled in kindergarten.
         (AA) "Related services" includes:
         (1) Child study, special education supervisors and coordinators, speech and hearing services,
adaptive physical development services, occupational or physical therapy, teacher assistants for
children with disabilities whose disabilities are described in division (B) of section 3317.013 or
division (G)(3) of this section, behavioral intervention, interpreter services, work study, nursing
services, and specialized integrative services as those terms are defined by the department;
         (2) Speech and language services provided to any student with a disability, including any
student whose primary or only disability is a speech and language disability;
         (3) Any related service not specifically covered by other state funds but specified in federal
law, including but not limited to, audiology and school psychological services;
         (4) Any service included in units funded under former division (O)(1) of section 3317.024 of
the Revised Code;
         (5) Any other related service needed by children with disabilities in accordance with their
individualized education programs.
         (BB) "School district," unless otherwise specified, means city, local, and exempted village
school districts.
         (CC) "Separately educated student with a disability" has the same meaning as in section
3313.974 of the Revised Code.
         (DD) "State education aid" has the same meaning as in section 5751.20 of the Revised Code.
         (EE)(1) "State share percentage" means the following for a city, local, or exempted village
school district:
         (a) For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, the state share percentage calculated under section
3317.017 of the Revised Code;
         (b) For fiscal year 2024 and each fiscal year thereafter, a percentage calculated in a manner
determined by the general assembly.
         (2) "State share percentage" means the following for a joint vocational school district:
         (a) For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, the percentage calculated in accordance with the
following formula:
  The amount computed for the district under division (A)(1) of section 3317.16 of the
 Revised Code for that fiscal year / the aggregate base cost calculated for the district for
            that fiscal year under section 3317.012 of the Revised Code
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                         134th G.A.
                                                  58
         (b) For fiscal year 2024 and each fiscal year thereafter, a percentage calculated in a manner
determined by the general assembly.
         (FF) "Statewide average base cost per pupil" means the following:
         (1) For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, the statewide average base cost per pupil calculated under
division (A) of section 3317.018 of the Revised Code;
         (2) For fiscal year 2024 and each fiscal year thereafter, an amount calculated in a manner
determined by the general assembly.
         (GG) "Statewide average career-technical base cost per pupil" means the following:
         (1) For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, the statewide average career-technical base cost per pupil
calculated under division (B) of section 3317.018 of the Revised Code;
         (2) For fiscal year 2024 and each fiscal year thereafter, an amount calculated in a manner
determined by the general assembly.
         (HH) "STEM school" means a science, technology, engineering, and mathematics school
established under Chapter 3326. of the Revised Code.
         (II) "Taxes charged and payable" means the taxes charged and payable against real and public
utility property after making the reduction required by section 319.301 of the Revised Code, plus the
taxes levied against tangible personal property.
         (JJ) For purposes of sections 3317.017 and 3317.16 of the Revised Code, "three-year average
valuation" for a fiscal year means the average of total taxable value for the three most recent tax
years for which data is available, as certified under section 3317.021 of the Revised Code.
         (KK) "Total ADM" means, for a city, local, or exempted village school district, the
enrollment reported under division (A) of section 3317.03 of the Revised Code minus the enrollment
reported under divisions (A)(2)(a), (b), (g), (h), and (i) of that section, as verified by the
superintendent of public instruction and adjusted if so ordered under division (K) of that section.
         (LL) "Total special education ADM" means the sum of categories one through six special
education ADM.
         (MM) "Total taxable value" means the sum of the amounts certified for a city, local,
exempted village, or joint vocational school district under divisions (A)(1) and (2) of section
3317.021 of the Revised Code.
         (NN) "Tuition discount" means any deduction from the base tuition amount per student
charged by a chartered nonpublic school, to which the student's family is entitled due to one or more
of the following conditions:
         (1) The student's family has multiple children enrolled in the same school.
         (2) The student's family is a member of or affiliated with a religious or secular organization
that provides oversight of the school or from which the school has agreed to enroll students.
         (3) The student's parent is an employee of the school.
         (4) Some other qualification not based on the income of the student's family or the student's
athletic or academic ability and for which all students in the school may qualify.
         Sec. 3317.024. The following shall be distributed monthly, quarterly, or annually as may be
determined by the state board of education:
         (A) An amount for each island school district and each joint state school district for the
operation of each high school and each elementary school maintained within such district and for
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                              134th G.A.
                                                    59
capital improvements for such schools. Such amounts shall be determined on the basis of standards
adopted by the state board of education. However, for fiscal years 2012 and 2013, an island district
shall receive the lesser of its actual cost of operation, as certified to the department of education, or
ninety-three per cent of the amount the district received in state operating funding for fiscal year
2011. If an island district received no funding for fiscal year 2011, it shall receive no funding for
either of fiscal year 2012 or 2013.
         (B) An amount for each school district required to pay tuition for a child in an institution
maintained by the department of youth services pursuant to section 3317.082 of the Revised Code,
provided the child was not included in the calculation of the district's formula ADM, as that term is
defined in section 3317.02 of the Revised Code, for the preceding school year.
         (C) (C)(1) An amount for the approved cost of transporting eligible pupils with disabilities
attending a special education program approved by the department of education whom it is
impossible or impractical to transport by regular school bus in the course of regular route
transportation provided by the school district or educational service center. For fiscal years 2022 and
2023, in the case of a school district, this amount shall be equal to the actual costs incurred in the
prior fiscal year by the district or service center when transporting those students, as reported to the
department, times multiplied by one of the following:
         (a) For a district, the percentage determined for the district for that fiscal year under divisions
(E)(3)(a) to (f) (E)(1)(c)(i) and (ii) of section 3317.0212 of the Revised Code. No ;
         (b) For a service center, twenty-nine and one-sixth per cent for fiscal year 2022 and thirty-
three and one-third per cent for fiscal year 2023.
         (2) No district or service center is eligible to receive a payment under this division (C) of this
section for the cost of transporting any pupil whom it transports by regular school bus and who is
included in the district's transportation ADM. The state board of education shall establish standards
and guidelines for use by the department of education in determining the approved cost of such
transportation for each service center. For
         (3) For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, the both of the following apply:
         (a) The state board shall also establish the deadline for each district and service center to
report its actual costs for transporting these students described in division (C)(1) of this section . For
fiscal years 2022 and 2023,
         (b) The costs reported by each district and service center under this division (C) of this
section shall be subject to periodic, random audits by the department.
         (D) An amount to each school district, including each cooperative education school district,
pursuant to section 3313.81 of the Revised Code to assist in providing free lunches to needy children.
The amounts shall be determined on the basis of rules adopted by the state board of education.
         (E)(1) An amount for auxiliary services to each school district, for each pupil attending a
chartered nonpublic elementary or high school within the district that has not elected to receive funds
under division (E)(2) of this section.
         (2)(a) An amount for auxiliary services paid directly to each chartered nonpublic school that
has elected to receive funds under division (E)(2) of this section for each pupil attending the school.
To elect to receive funds under division (E)(2) of this section, a school, by the first day of April of
each odd-numbered year, shall notify the department and the school district in which the school is
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                           134th G.A.
                                                   60
located of the election and shall submit to the department an affidavit certifying that the school shall
expend the funds in the manner outlined in section 3317.062 of the Revised Code. The election shall
take effect the following first day of July. The school subsequently may rescind its election, but it
may do so only in an odd-numbered year by notifying the department and the school district in which
the school is located of the rescission not later than the first day of April of that year. Beginning the
following first day of July after the rescission, the school shall receive funds under division (E)(1) of
this section.
         (b) A chartered nonpublic school that elects to receive auxiliary services funds under division
(E)(2) of this section may designate an organization that oversees one or more nonpublic schools to
receive those funds on its behalf.
         (i) Each chartered nonpublic school that designates an organization to receive auxiliary
services funds on its behalf shall notify the department of education of the organization's name not
later than the first day of April of each odd-numbered year.
         (ii) A school may rescind its decision, but may do so only in each odd-numbered year by
notifying the department of that rescission not later than the first day of April of that year. A
rescission submitted in compliance with this division takes effect on the following first day of July,
and the school district may elect to then begin receiving auxiliary services funds directly or as
specified under division (E)(1) of this section.
         (iii) An organization shall disburse the auxiliary services funds of all chartered nonpublic
schools that have designated the organization to receive funds on their behalf in accordance with
division (E)(2)(b) of this section. If multiple chartered nonpublic schools designate the same
organization to receive auxiliary services funds on their behalf, that organization may use one or
more accounts for the purposes of managing the funds. The organization shall maintain appropriate
accounting and reporting standards and ensure that each chartered nonpublic school receives the
auxiliary services funds to which the school is entitled.
         (iv) Each chartered nonpublic school that elects to receive funds directly in accordance with
division (E)(2) of this section or the organization designated to receive and disburse auxiliary
services funds on behalf of a chartered nonpublic school shall maintain records of receipt and
expenditures of the funds in a manner that conforms with generally accepted accounting principles.
         (v) The department of education shall create and disseminate a standardized reporting form
that chartered nonpublic schools and organizations designated to receive funds in accordance with
division (E)(2)(b) of this section may use to comply with division (E)(2)(b)(iv) of this section.
However, the department shall not require schools to use that form.
         (vi) An organization that manages a school's auxiliary services funds pursuant to a
designation made in accordance with division (E)(2)(b) of this section may require the school's
governing authority to pay a fee for that service that does not exceed four per cent of the total amount
of payments for auxiliary services that the school receives from the state. A school may pay any fee
assessed pursuant to division (E)(2)(b)(vi) of this section using auxiliary services funds.
         (c) The amount paid under divisions (E)(1) and (2) of this section shall equal the total amount
appropriated for the implementation of sections 3317.06 and 3317.062 of the Revised Code divided
by the average daily membership in grades kindergarten through twelve in chartered nonpublic
elementary and high schools within the state as determined as of the last day of October of each
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                          134th G.A.
                                                  61
school year.
         (F) An amount for each county board of developmental disabilities, distributed on the basis of
standards adopted by the state board of education, for the approved cost of transportation required for
children attending special education programs operated by the county board under section 3323.09 of
the Revised Code;. For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, this amount shall be equal to the actual costs
incurred in the prior fiscal year by the county board when transporting those students multiplied by
twenty-nine and one-sixth per cent for fiscal year 2022 and thirty-three and one-third per cent for
fiscal year 2023.
         (G) An amount to each institution defined under section 3317.082 of the Revised Code
providing elementary or secondary education to children other than children receiving special
education under section 3323.091 of the Revised Code. This amount for any institution in any fiscal
year shall equal the total of all tuition amounts required to be paid to the institution under division
(A)(1) of section 3317.082 of the Revised Code.
         The state board of education or any other board of education or governing board may provide
for any resident of a district or educational service center territory any educational service for which
funds are made available to the board by the United States under the authority of public law, whether
such funds come directly or indirectly from the United States or any agency or department thereof or
through the state or any agency, department, or political subdivision thereof.
         Sec. 3317.0212. (A) As used in this section:
         (1) For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, "assigned bus" means a school bus used to transport
qualifying riders.
         (2) For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, "density" means the total riders per square mile of a
school district.
         (3) For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, "nontraditional ridership" means the average number of
qualifying riders who are enrolled in a community school established under Chapter 3314. of the
Revised Code, in a STEM school established under Chapter 3326. of the Revised Code, or in a
nonpublic school and are provided school bus service by a school district during the first full week of
October.
         (4) "Qualifying riders" means the following:
         (a) For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, resident students enrolled in preschool and regular
education in grades kindergarten to twelve who are provided school bus service by a school district,
including students with dual enrollment in a joint vocational school district or a cooperative
education school district, and students enrolled in a community school, STEM school, or nonpublic
school;
         (b) For fiscal year 2024 and each fiscal year thereafter, students specified by the general
assembly.
         (5) "Qualifying ridership" means the following:
         (a) For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, the greater of the average number of qualifying riders
counted in the morning or counted in the afternoon who are provided school bus service by a school
district during the first full week of October;
         (b) For fiscal year 2024 and each fiscal year thereafter, a ridership determined in a manner
specified by the general assembly.
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                             134th G.A.
                                                    62
        (6) "Rider density" means the following:
        (a) For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, the following quotient:
  A school district's total number of qualifying riders/ the number of square miles in the
                                           district
         (b) For fiscal year 2024 and each fiscal year thereafter, a number calculated in a manner
determined by the general assembly.
         (7) For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, "riders" means students enrolled in regular and special
education in grades kindergarten through twelve who are provided school bus service by a school
district, including students with dual enrollment in a joint vocational school district or a cooperative
education school district, and students enrolled in a community school, STEM school, or nonpublic
school.
         (8) "School bus service" means a school district's transportation of qualifying riders in any of
the following types of vehicles:
         (a) School buses owned or leased by the district;
         (b) School buses operated by a private contractor hired by the district;
         (c) School buses operated by another school district or entity with which the district has
contracted, either as part of a consortium for the provision of transportation or otherwise.
         (B) Not later than the first day of November, for fiscal years 2022 and 2023, or a date
determined by the general assembly, for fiscal year 2024 and each fiscal year thereafter, of each year,
each city, local, and exempted village school district shall report to the department of education its
qualifying ridership and any other information requested by the department. Subsequent adjustments
to the reported numbers shall be made only in accordance with rules adopted by the department.
         (C) The department shall calculate the statewide transportation cost per student as follows:
         (1) Determine each city, local, and exempted village school district's transportation cost per
student by dividing the district's total costs for school bus service in the previous fiscal year by its
qualifying ridership in the previous fiscal year.
         (2) After excluding districts that do not provide school bus service and the ten districts with
the highest transportation costs per student and the ten districts with the lowest transportation costs
per student, divide the aggregate cost for school bus service for the remaining districts in the previous
fiscal year by the aggregate qualifying ridership of those districts in the previous fiscal year.
         (D) The department shall calculate the statewide transportation cost per mile as follows:
         (1) Determine each city, local, and exempted village school district's transportation cost per
mile by dividing the district's total costs for school bus service in the previous fiscal year by its total
number of miles driven for school bus service in the previous fiscal year.
         (2) After excluding districts that do not provide school bus service and the ten districts with
the highest transportation costs per mile and the ten districts with the lowest transportation costs per
mile, divide the aggregate cost for school bus service for the remaining districts in the previous fiscal
year by the aggregate miles driven for school bus service in those districts in the previous fiscal year.
         (E) The department shall calculate each city, local, and exempted village school district's
transportation base payment as follows:
         (1) For fiscal years 2022 and 2023:
         (a) Calculate the sum of the following:
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                                134th G.A.
                                                     63
         (i) The product of the statewide transportation cost per student and the number of students
counted in the district's qualifying ridership for the current fiscal year who are enrolled in the district;
         (ii) 1.5 times the statewide transportation cost per student times the number of students
counted in the district's qualifying ridership for the current fiscal year who are enrolled in community
schools established under Chapter 3314. of the Revised Code or STEM schools established under
Chapter 3326. of the Revised Code;
         (iii) 2.0 times the statewide transportation cost per student times the number of students
counted in the district's qualifying ridership for the current fiscal year who are enrolled in nonpublic
schools.
         (b) Multiply the statewide transportation cost per mile by the district's total number of miles
driven for school bus service in the current fiscal year.
         (c) Multiply the greater of the amounts calculated under divisions (E)(1)(a) and (b) of this
section by the following:
         (i) For fiscal year 2022, the greater of twenty-nine and one-sixth per cent or the district's state
share percentage, as defined in section 3317.02 of the Revised Code;
         (ii) For fiscal year 2023, the greater of thirty-three and one-third per cent or the district's state
share percentage.
         (2) For fiscal year 2024 and each fiscal year thereafter, an amount determined by the general
assembly.
         (F) For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, the department shall pay a district's efficiency adjustment
payment in accordance with divisions (F)(1) to (3) of this section. For fiscal year 2024 and each
fiscal year thereafter, the department shall pay a district's efficiency adjustment payment in a manner
determined by the general assembly, if the general assembly authorizes such a payment to districts.
         (1) The department annually shall establish a target number of qualifying riders per assigned
bus for each city, local, and exempted village school district. The department shall use the most
recently available data in establishing the target number. The target number shall be based on the
statewide median number of riders per assigned bus as adjusted to reflect the district's density in
comparison to the density of all other districts. The department shall post on the department's web
site each district's target number of riders per assigned bus and a description of how the target
number was determined.
         (2) The department shall determine each school district's efficiency index by dividing the
district's number of riders per assigned bus by its target number of riders per assigned bus.
         (3) The department shall determine each city, local, and exempted village school district's
efficiency adjustment payment as follows:
         (a) If the district's efficiency index is equal to or greater than 1.5, the efficiency adjustment
payment shall be calculated according to the following formula:
  0.15 X the district's transportation base payment calculated under division (E) of this
                                           section
        (b) If the district's efficiency index is less than 1.5 but greater than or equal to 1.0, the
efficiency adjustment payment shall be calculated according to the following formula:
  {[(The district's efficiency index - 1) X 0.15]/0.5} X the district's transportation base
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                                134th G.A.
                                                     64
                    payment calculated under division (E) of this section
        (c) If the district's efficiency index is less than 1.0, the efficiency adjustment payment shall be
zero.
        (G) In addition to funds paid under divisions (E), (F), and (H) of this section, each city, local,
and exempted village district shall receive in accordance with rules adopted by the state board of
education a payment for students transported by means other than school bus service and whose
transportation is not funded under division (C) of section 3317.024 of the Revised Code. The rules
shall include provisions for school district reporting of such students.
        (H)(1) For purposes of division (H) of this section, a school district's "transportation
supplement percentage" means the following:
        (a) For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, the following quotient:
                             (28 – the district's rider density) / 100
         If the result of the calculation for a district under division (H)(1)(a) of this section is less than
zero, the district's transportation supplement percentage shall be zero.
         (b) For fiscal year 2024 and each fiscal year thereafter, a percentage calculated in a manner
determined by the general assembly.
         (2) The department shall pay each district a transportation supplement calculated according to
the following formula:
    The district's transportation supplement percentage X the amount calculated for the
               district under division (E)(2) (E)(1)(b) of this section X 0.55
        (I)(1) If a school district board and a community school governing authority elect to enter
into an agreement under division (A) of section 3314.091 of the Revised Code, the department shall
make payments to the community school according to the terms of the agreement for each student
actually transported under division (C)(1) of that section. If a community school governing authority
accepts transportation responsibility under division (B) of that section, the department shall make
payments to the community school for each student actually transported or for whom transportation
is arranged by the community school under division (C)(1) of that section, calculated as follows:
        (a) For any fiscal year which the general assembly has specified that transportation payments
to school districts be based on an across-the-board percentage of the district's payment for the
previous school year, the per pupil payment to the community school shall be the following quotient:
        (i) The total amount calculated for the school district in which the child is entitled to attend
school for student transportation other than transportation of children with disabilities; divided by
        (ii) The number of students included in the district's transportation ADM for the current fiscal
year, as calculated under section 3317.03 of the Revised Code, plus the number of students enrolled
in the community school not counted in the district's transportation ADM who are transported under
division (B)(1) or (2) of section 3314.091 of the Revised Code.
        (b) For any fiscal year which the general assembly has specified that the transportation
payments to school districts be calculated in accordance with this section and any rules of the state
board of education implementing this section, the payment to the community school shall be the
following:
        (i) For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, either of the following:
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                             134th G.A.
                                                    65
         (I) If the school district in which the student is entitled to attend school would have used a
method of transportation for the student for which payments are computed and paid under division
(E) of this section, 1.0 times the statewide transportation cost per student, as calculated in division
(C) of this section;
         (II) If the school district in which the student is entitled to attend school would have used a
method of transportation for the student for which payments are computed and paid in a manner not
described in division (H)(1)(b)(i) (G) of this section, the amount that would otherwise be computed
for and paid to the district.
         (ii) For fiscal year 2024 and each fiscal year thereafter, an amount calculated in a manner
determined by the general assembly.
         The community school, however, is not required to use the same method to transport the
student.
         As used in this division, "entitled to attend school" means entitled to attend school under
section 3313.64 or 3313.65 of the Revised Code.
         (2) A community school shall be paid under division (H)(1) of this section only for students
who are eligible as specified in section 3327.01 of the Revised Code and division (C)(1) of section
3314.091 of the Revised Code, and whose transportation to and from school is actually provided,
who actually utilized transportation arranged, or for whom a payment in lieu of transportation is
made by the community school's governing authority. To qualify for the payments, the community
school shall report to the department, in the form and manner required by the department, data on the
number of students transported or whose transportation is arranged, the number of miles traveled,
cost to transport, and any other information requested by the department.
         Sec. 3317.0215. (A)(1) For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, the department of education shall
withhold from the aggregate amount paid for a fiscal year to each city, local, exempted village, and
joint vocational school district, community school established under Chapter 3314. of the Revised
Code, and science, technology, engineering, and mathematics school established under Chapter 3326.
of the Revised Code an amount equal to the following:
         (a) In the case of a city, local, or exempted village, or joint vocational school district, an the
aggregate amount calculated as follows:
         0.10 X [(the district's category one special education ADM X the multiple specified in
division (A) of section 3317.013 of the Revised Code X the statewide average base cost per pupil for
that fiscal year X the district's state share percentage) + (the district's category two special education
ADM X the multiple specified in division (B) of section 3317.013 of the Revised Code X the
statewide average base cost per pupil for that fiscal year X the district's state share percentage) + (the
district's category three special education ADM X the multiple specified in division (C) of section
3317.013 of the Revised Code X the statewide average base cost per pupil for that fiscal year X the
district's state share percentage) + (the district's category four special education ADM X the multiple
specified in division (D) of section 3317.013 of the Revised Code X the statewide average base cost
per pupil for that fiscal year X the district's state share percentage) + (the district's category five
special education ADM X the multiple specified in division (E) of section 3317.013 of the Revised
Code X the statewide average base cost per pupil for that fiscal year X the district's state share
percentage) + (the district's category six special education ADM X the multiple specified in division
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                           134th G.A.
                                                   66
(F) of section 3317.013 of the Revised Code X the statewide average base cost per pupil for that
fiscal year X the district's state share percentage)] of special education funding paid to the district
under division (A)(3) of section 3317.022 of the Revised Code times 0.10, subject to any funding
limitations enacted by the general assembly to the computation.
         (b) In the case of a community school or STEM school, the aggregate amount of special
education funding paid to the school under division (A)(1)(b) of section 3317.022 3317.026 of the
Revised Code times 0.10, subject to any funding limitations enacted by the general assembly to the
computation.
         (c) In the case of a science, technology, engineering, or mathematics school joint vocational
school district, the aggregate amount of special education funding paid to the school under division
(A)(2) of section 3317.022 3317.16 of the Revised Code times 0.10, subject to any funding
limitations enacted by the general assembly to the computation.
         (2) For fiscal year 2024 and each fiscal year thereafter, the department of education shall
withhold from the aggregate amount paid for a fiscal year to each city, local, exempted village, and
joint vocational school district, community school, and science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics school an amount determined by the general assembly, if any, for purposes of this
section.
         (B) For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, the department shall use the amount of funds withheld
under division (A) of this section for purposes of division (C)(1) of section 3314.08 of the Revised
Code, section 3317.0214 of the Revised Code, division (B) of section 3317.16 of the Revised Code,
and section 3326.34 of the Revised Code.
         For fiscal year 2024 and each fiscal year thereafter, the department shall use the amount of
funds withheld under division (A) of this section, if any, for purposes determined by the general
assembly.
         Sec. 3317.051. (A) The department of education shall compute and pay to a school district
funds based on units for services to students identified as gifted under Chapter 3324. of the Revised
Code as prescribed by this section.
         (B) The department shall allocate gifted units for a school district as follows:
         (1) For fiscal years 2022 and 2023:
         (a) One gifted coordinator unit shall be allocated for every 3,300 students in a district's
enrolled ADM, with a minimum of 0.5 units and a maximum of 8 units allocated for the district.
         (b) One kindergarten through eighth grade gifted intervention specialist unit shall be
allocated for every 140 gifted students enrolled in grades kindergarten through eight in the district, as
certified under division (B)(22) of section 3317.03 of the Revised Code, with a minimum of 0.3 units
allocated for the district.
         (c) One ninth through twelfth grade gifted intervention specialist unit shall be allocated for
every 140 gifted students enrolled in grades nine through twelve in the district, as certified under
division (B)(22) of section 3317.03 of the Revised Code, with a minimum of 0.3 units allocated for
the district.
         (2) For fiscal year 2024 and each fiscal year thereafter, in the manner prescribed by the
general assembly.
         (C) The department shall pay an amount to a school district for gifted units as follows:
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                            134th G.A.
                                                   67
        (a) (1) For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, an amount equal to the following sum:
  ($85,776 X the number of units allocated to a school district under division (B)(1) (B)
 (1)(a) of this section X the district's state share percentage) + ($89,378 X the number of
  units allocated to a school district under division (B)(2) (B)(1)(b) of this section X the
 district's state share percentage) + ($80,974 X the number of units allocated to a school
      district under division (B)(3) (B)(1)(c) of this section X the district's state share
                                           percentage)
         (b) (2) For fiscal year 2024 and each fiscal year thereafter, an amount calculated in a manner
determined by the general assembly.
         (D) A school district may assign gifted unit funding that it receives under division (C) of this
section to another school district, an educational service center, a community school, or a STEM
school as part of an arrangement to provide services to the district.
         Sec. 3317.064. (A) There is hereby established in the state treasury the auxiliary services
reimbursement fund. By the thirtieth day of January of each odd-numbered year, the director of job
and family services and the superintendent of public instruction shall determine the amount of any
excess moneys in the auxiliary services personnel unemployment compensation fund not reasonably
necessary for the purposes of section 4141.47 of the Revised Code, and shall certify such amount to
the director of budget and management for transfer to the auxiliary services reimbursement fund. If
the director of job and family services and the superintendent disagree on such amount, the director
of budget and management shall determine the amount to be transferred.
         (B) Except as provided in divisions (C) and (D) of this section, moneys in the auxiliary
services reimbursement fund shall be used for the relocation or for the replacement and repair of
mobile units used to provide the services specified in division (E), (F), (G), or (I) of section 3317.06
and in division (A)(3) of section 3317.062 of the Revised Code. The state board of education shall
adopt guidelines and procedures for replacement, repair, and relocation of mobile units and the
procedures under which a school district or chartered nonpublic school may apply to receive moneys
with which to repair or replace or relocate such units.
         (C) School districts and educational service centers may apply to the department for moneys
from the auxiliary services reimbursement fund for payment of incentives for early retirement and
severance for school district personnel assigned to provide services authorized by section 3317.06 or
3317.062 of the Revised Code at chartered nonpublic schools. The portion of the cost of any early
retirement or severance incentive for any employee that is paid using money from the auxiliary
services reimbursement fund shall not exceed the percentage of such employee's total service credit
that the employee spent providing services to chartered nonpublic school students under section
3317.06 of the Revised Code.
         (D) The department of education may use a portion of the moneys in the auxiliary services
reimbursement fund to make payments for chartered nonpublic school students under section
3365.07 of the Revised Code, in accordance with rules adopted pursuant to section 3365.071 of the
Revised Code.
         Sec. 3317.25. (A) As used in this section, "disadvantaged pupil impact aid" means the
following:
         (1) For a city, local, or exempted village school district, the funds received under division (A)
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                           134th G.A.
                                                   68
(4) (A)(4)(a) of section 3317.022 of the Revised Code;
        (2) For a joint vocational school district, the funds received under division (A)(3) of section
3317.16 of the Revised Code;
        (3) For a community school established under Chapter 3314. of the Revised Code, the funds
received under division (A)(4)(b) of section 3314.08 3317.022 of the Revised Code;
        (4) For a STEM school established under Chapter 3326. of the Revised Code, the funds
received under division (A)(4)(b) of section 3326.33 3317.022 of the Revised Code.
        (B)(1) For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, a city, local, exempted village, or joint vocational
school district, community school, or STEM school shall spend the disadvantaged pupil impact aid it
receives for any of the following initiatives or a combination of any of the following initiatives:
        (a) Extended school day and school year;
        (b) Reading improvement and intervention;
        (c) Instructional technology or blended learning;
        (d) Professional development in reading instruction for teachers of students in kindergarten
through third grade;
        (e) Dropout prevention;
        (f) School safety and security measures;
        (g) Community learning centers that address barriers to learning;
        (h) Academic interventions for students in any of grades six through twelve;
        (i) Employment of an individual who has successfully completed the bright new leaders for
Ohio schools program as a principal or an assistant principal under section 3319.272 of the Revised
Code;
        (j) Mental health services, including telehealth services;
        (k) Culturally appropriate, evidence-based or evidence-informed prevention education,
including youth-led programming and social and emotional learning curricula to promote mental
health and prevent substance use and suicide;
        (l) Services for homeless youth;
        (m) Services for child welfare involved youth;
        (n) Community liaisons or programs that connect students to community resources, including
city connects, communities in schools, and other similar programs;
        (o) Physical health care services, including telehealth services;
        (p) Family engagement and support services;
        (q) Student services provided prior to or after the regularly scheduled school day or any time
school is not in session, including mentoring programs.
        (2) For fiscal year 2024 and each fiscal year thereafter, each city, local, exempted village, and
joint vocational school district, community school, and STEM school shall spend the disadvantaged
pupil impact aid it receives for one or more initiatives specified by the general assembly.
        (C)(1) For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, each city, local, exempted village, and joint vocational
school district, community school, and STEM school that is subject to the requirements of this
section shall develop a plan for utilizing the disadvantaged pupil impact aid it receives in
coordination with at least one of the following community partners:
        (a) A board of alcohol, drug addiction, and mental health services established under Chapter
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                            134th G.A.
                                                   69
340. of the Revised Code;
        (b) An educational service center;
        (c) A county board of developmental disabilities;
        (d) A community-based mental health treatment provider;
        (e) A board of health of a city or general health district;
        (f) A county department of job and family services;
        (g) A nonprofit organization with experience serving children;
        (h) A public hospital agency.
        (2) For fiscal year 2024 and each fiscal year thereafter, each city, local, exempted village, and
joint vocational school district, community school, and STEM school that is subject to the
requirements of this section shall develop a plan for utilizing the disadvantaged pupil impact aid it
receives in the manner specified by the general assembly, if the general assembly requires city, local,
exempted village, and joint vocational school districts, community schools, and STEM schools to
develop such a plan.
        (D) After the end of each fiscal year, each city, local, exempted village, or joint vocational
school district, community school, and STEM school shall submit a report to the department of
education describing the initiative or initiatives on which the district's or school's disadvantaged pupil
impact aid were spent during that fiscal year. For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, this report shall be
submitted in a manner prescribed by the department and shall also describe the amount of money that
was spent on each initiative.
        (E) Starting in 2015, the department shall submit a report of the information it receives under
division (C) of this section to the General Assembly general assembly not later than the first day of
December of each odd-numbered year in accordance with section 101.68 of the Revised Code.
        Sec. 3319.077. (A) As used in this section:
        (1) "Dyslexia" has the same meaning as in section 3323.25 of the Revised Code.
        (2) "Ohio dyslexia committee" means the committee established under section 3325.25 of the
Revised Code.
        (3) "Special education" has the same meaning as in section 3323.01 of the Revised Code.
        (4) "Teacher" does not include any teacher who provides instruction in fine arts, music, or
physical education.
        (B)(1) The department of education, in collaboration with the Ohio dyslexia committee, shall
maintain a list of courses training that fulfill fulfills the professional development requirements
prescribed in division (C) of this section. The list may consist of online or classroom learning
models.
        (2) Each approved course training shall align with the guidebook developed under section
3323.25 of the Revised Code, be evidence-based, and require instruction and training for identifying
characteristics of dyslexia and understanding the pedagogy for instructing students with dyslexia.
        (3) The Ohio dyslexia committee shall prescribe a total number of clock hours of instruction
in courses training approved under this section for a teacher to complete to satisfy the professional
development requirements prescribed in division (C) of this section. The Ohio dyslexia committee
shall prescribe a total number of clock hours that is not less than six clock hours and not more than
eighteen clock hours.
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                             134th G.A.
                                                    70
         (C)(1) Not later than the beginning of the 2023-2024 school year, each teacher employed by a
local, city, or exempted village school district who provides instruction for students in kindergarten
and first grade, including those providing special education instruction, shall complete the number of
instructional hours in approved professional development courses training required by the committee
under this section.
         (2) Not later than the beginning of the 2024-2025 school year, each teacher employed by a
school district who provides instruction for students in grades two and three, including those
providing special education instruction, shall complete the number of instructional hours in approved
professional development courses training required by the committee under this section.
         (3) Not later than the beginning of the 2025-2026 school year, each teacher employed by a
school district who provides special education instruction for students in grades four through twelve
shall complete a professional development course training approved under division (B) of this
section.
         (D) Any professional development course training completed by a teacher prior to the
effective date of this section April 12, 2021, that is then included on the list of courses training
approved under division (B)(1) of this section shall count toward the number of instructional hours in
approved professional development courses training required under division (C) of this section.
         (E) Nothing in this section shall prohibit a school district from requiring employees who are
not subject to this section from completing professional development training approved under
division (B) of this section.
         Sec. 3319.078. Beginning in the 2022-2023 school year, each city, local, and exempted
village school district shall establish a multi-sensory structured literacy certification process for
teachers providing instruction for students in grades kindergarten through three employed by the
district. Each process shall align with the guidebook developed under section 3323.25 of the Revised
Code.
         Sec. 3319.263. Beginning on the first day of July succeeding the effective date of this section
and for only five years thereafter, notwithstanding anything to the contrary in section 3319.26 of the
Revised Code or any rule of the state board of education adopted under that section, the state board
and the department of education shall not limit the subject areas for which an individual may receive
an alternative resident educator license issued under that section.
         Sec. 3323.25. (A) As used in this section and section 3323.251 of the Revised Code:
         (1) "Dyslexia" means a specific learning disorder that is neurological in origin and that is
characterized by unexpected difficulties with accurate or fluent word recognition and by poor
spelling and decoding abilities not consistent with the person's intelligence, motivation, and sensory
capabilities, which difficulties typically result from a deficit in the phonological component of
language.
         (2) "Appropriate certification" means either of the following:
         (a) Certification at a certified level, or higher, from a research-based, multi-sensory structured
literacy program;
         (b) Any other certification as recognized by a majority vote of the Ohio dyslexia committee.
         (B)(1) The department of education shall establish the Ohio dyslexia committee which shall
consist of the following members:
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                             134th G.A.
                                                    71
         (a) A school district superintendent appointed by the superintendent of public instruction;
         (b) An elementary school principal appointed by the state superintendent;
         (c) A classroom teacher appointed by the state superintendent. The teacher shall have an
appropriate certification and at least two years of experience teaching in a multi-sensory structured
literacy program.
         (d) An educational service center employee appointed by the state superintendent. The
employee shall have an appropriate certification.
         (e) An employee of the department of education appointed by the state superintendent;
         (f) A parent of a child with dyslexia or an adult with dyslexia appointed by the international
dyslexia association in Ohio;
         (g) An individual with experience in higher education and teacher preparation programs
appointed by the chancellor of higher education. The individual appointed by the chancellor shall
have an appropriate certification.
         (h) A board member of the international dyslexia association in Ohio appointed by the
international dyslexia association in Ohio. The board member shall have an appropriate certification.
         (i) A school psychologist appointed by the state superintendent;
         (j) A reading intervention specialist appointed by the state superintendent. The reading
intervention specialist shall have an appropriate certification.
         (k) A speech-language pathologist appointed by the state speech and hearing professionals
board. The speech-language pathologist shall have an appropriate certification.
         (2) Each appointing authority shall determine a selection process for the appointments under
this section. Each appointing authority that is not the state superintendent shall make and submit to
the department each appointment prescribed under this section not later than thirty days after the
effective date of this section April 12, 2021. The state superintendent also shall make each
appointment prescribed to the state superintendent under this section not later than that date.
Members of the committee shall serve at the pleasure of their appointing authority.
         (3) An individual may be appointed to the committee without required certification or
experience if the appointing authority determines that the individual has sufficient experience in the
individual's respective field.
         (4) The state superintendent shall convene the first meeting of the committee within thirty
days after nine members have been appointed to the committee. At the first meeting, members of the
committee shall elect one of the members as chairperson.
         (5) The department shall provide facilities for the meetings of the committee.
         (C)(1) Not later than December 31, 2021, the Ohio dyslexia committee shall develop a
guidebook regarding the best practices and methods for universal screening, intervention, and
remediation for children with dyslexia or children displaying dyslexic characteristics and tendencies
using a multi-sensory structured literacy program.
         (2) The committee shall provide an opportunity for public input when developing the
guidebook, in the manner determined by the committee.
         (3) Prior to its distribution, the guidebook shall be subject to final approval by the state board
of education.
         (4) The guidebook shall be developed and issued to districts and schools in an electronic
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                          134th G.A.
                                                  72
format. After the initial development of the guidebook, the Ohio dyslexia committee shall update the
guidebook as necessary.
         (D) Not later than December 31, 2021, the department, in collaboration with the Ohio
dyslexia committee, shall do all of the following:
         (1) Provide multi-sensory structured literacy program professional development for teachers
in evidence-based dyslexia screening and intervention practices for the purposes of section 3319.077
of the Revised Code.
         (2) Assist school districts and other public schools in establishing multidisciplinary teams to
support the identification, intervention, and remediation of dyslexia;
         (3) Develop reporting mechanisms for districts and schools to submit to the department the
information and data required in the guidebook developed under this section;
         (4) Develop academic standards for kindergarten in reading and writing that incorporate a
multi-sensory structured literacy program;
         (5) Provide on the department's web site information about training for teachers about
dyslexia that is available at minimal or no cost.
         (E) The department, in collaboration with the Ohio dyslexia committee, shall identify
reliable, valid, universal, and evidence-based screening and intervention measures that evaluate the
literacy skills of students enrolled in grades kindergarten through five using a multi-sensory
structured literacy program.
         (F) The Ohio dyslexia committee may do any of the following:
         (1) Recommend appropriate ratios in school buildings for students to teachers who have
received certification in identifying and addressing dyslexia;
         (2) Recommend which other school personnel, including school psychologists or speech-
language pathologists, should receive certification in identifying and addressing dyslexia;
         (3) Consider and make recommendations regarding whether professional development
required under section 3319.077 of the Revised Code should require the completion of a practicum.
         Sec. 3323.251. (A) Each school district and other public school shall do all of the following:
         (1) For the 2022-2023 2023-2024 school year, administer a tier one dyslexia screening
measure to a student to whom either of the following applies:
         (a) The student is enrolled in any of grades kindergarten through three. A screening measure
shall be administered to a student enrolled in kindergarten after January 1, 20232024, but prior to
January 1, 20242025.
         (b) The student is enrolled in any of grades four through six and either of the following
applies:
         (i) The student's parent, guardian, or custodian requests that the screening measure be
administered to the student.
         (ii) A classroom teacher requests that the screening measure be administered to the student
and the student's parent, guardian, or custodian grants permission for the screening measure to be
administered.
         A school district may implement the screening under division (A)(1) of this section prior to
the 2023-2024 school year.
         (2) For the 2023-2024 2024-2025 school year and each school year thereafter, administer a
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                             134th G.A.
                                                    73
tier one dyslexia screening measure to a student to whom either of the following applies:
         (a) A student enrolled in kindergarten. A screening measure shall be administered to a student
after the first day of January of the school year in which the student is enrolled in kindergarten and
prior to the first day of January of the following school year.
         (b) A student enrolled in any of grades one through six if either of the following applies:
         (i) The student's parent, guardian, or custodian requests that the screening measure be
administered to the student.
         (ii) A classroom teacher requests that the screening measure be administered to the student
and the student's parent, guardian, or custodian grants permission for the screening measure to be
administered.
         A district or school may administer a tier two dyslexia screening measure to a student to
whom the district or school administers a tier one screening measure under division (A)(1) or (2) of
this section. In that case, a district or school shall not be required to complete division (A)(4) of this
section.
         (3) Identify each student that is at risk of dyslexia based on the student's results on the tier
one screening measure and notify the student's parent, guardian, or custodian that the student has
been identified as being at risk.
         (4) Monitor the progress of each at-risk student toward attaining grade-level reading and
writing skills for up to six weeks. The district or school shall check each at-risk student's progress on
at least the second week, fourth week, and sixth week after the student is identified as being at risk. If
no progress is observed during the monitoring period, the district or school shall notify the parent,
guardian, or custodian of the student and administer a tier two dyslexia screening measure to the
student.
         (5) Report to a student's parent or guardian the student's results on a tier two screening
measure approved by the Ohio dyslexia committee within thirty days after the measure's
administration. If, as determined by the tier two screening measure, the student is identified as having
dyslexia tendencies, the student's parent or guardian shall be provided with information about reading
development, the risk factors for dyslexia, and descriptions for evidenced-based interventions.
         (6) If a student demonstrates markers for dyslexia, provide the student's parents or guardian
with a written explanation of the district or school's multi-sensory structured literacy program.
         (B)(1) Beginning in the 2022-2023 2023-2024 school year, each district or school shall:
         (a) Administer a tier one dyslexia screening measure to each kindergarten student that
transfers into the district or school midyear during the school's regularly scheduled screening of the
kindergarten class or within thirty days after the student's enrollment if the screening already has
been completed;
         (b) Administer a tier one dyslexia screening measure to each student in grades one through
six that transfers into the district or school midyear within thirty days after the student's enrollment.
         (2) If a student is identified as being at risk of dyslexia under division (B)(1) of this section,
the district or school shall administer a tier two screening measure in a timely manner.
         (C) Each district or school shall do all of the following:
         (1) Comply with any provisions that are statutorily required, as they pertain to the guidebook
developed under division (C) of section 3323.25 of the Revised Code;
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                            134th G.A.
                                                   74
         (2) Select screening and intervention measures to administer to students from the measures
identified under division (E) of section 3323.25 of the Revised Code;
         (3) Establish a multidisciplinary team to administer screening and intervention measures and
analyze the results of the measures. The team shall include trained and certified personnel and a
stakeholder with expertise in the identification, intervention, and remediation of dyslexia.
         (4) Report to the department of education the results of screening measures administered
under this section.
         In addition, districts and schools may utilize any best practices and recommendations
contained in the guidebook developed under division (C) of section 3323.25 of the Revised Code.
         Sec. 3326.39. (A) In any fiscal year, a STEM school receiving funds calculated under
division (A)(7) of section 3317.022 of the Revised Code shall spend those funds only for the
purposes that the department designates as approved for career-technical education expenses. Career-
technical education expenses approved by the department shall include only expenses connected to
the delivery of career-technical programming to career-technical students. The department shall
require the school to report data annually so that the department may monitor the school's compliance
with the requirements regarding the manner in which funding received under division (A)(8) (A)(7)
of section 3317.022 of the Revised Code may be spent.
         (B) All funds received under division (A)(7) of section 3317.022 of the Revised Code shall
be spent in the following manner:
         (1) At least seventy-five per cent of the funds shall be spent on curriculum development,
purchase, and implementation; instructional resources and supplies; industry-based program
certification; student assessment, credentialing, and placement; curriculum specific equipment
purchases and leases; career-technical student organization fees and expenses; home and agency
linkages; work-based learning experiences; professional development; and other costs directly
associated with career-technical education programs including development of new programs.
         (2) Not more than twenty-five per cent of the funds shall be used for personnel expenditures.
         (C) In any fiscal year, a science, technology, engineering, and mathematics school receiving
funds under division (H) of section 3317.014 of the Revised Code shall spend those funds only for
the following purposes:
         (1) Delivery of career awareness programs to students enrolled in grades kindergarten
through twelve;
         (2) Provision of a common, consistent curriculum to students throughout their primary and
secondary education;
         (3) Assistance to teachers in providing a career development curriculum to students;
         (4) Development of a career development plan for each student that stays with that student
for the duration of the student's primary and secondary education;
         (5) Provision of opportunities for students to engage in activities, such as career fairs, hands-
on experiences, and job shadowing, across all career pathways at each grade level.
         The department may deny payment under division (E) of section 3317.014 of the Revised
Code to any school that the department determines is using funds paid under division (H) of section
3317.014 of the Revised Code for other purposes.
         Sec. 4723.07. In accordance with Chapter 119. of the Revised Code, the board of nursing
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                              134th G.A.
                                                    75
shall adopt and may amend and rescind rules that establish all of the following:
         (A) Provisions for the board's government and control of its actions and business affairs;
         (B) Minimum Subject to section 4723.072 of the Revised Code, minimum standards for
nursing education programs that prepare graduates to be licensed under this chapter and procedures
for granting, renewing, and withdrawing approval of those programs;
         (C) Criteria that applicants for licensure must meet to be eligible to take examinations for
licensure;
         (D) Standards and procedures for renewal of the licenses and certificates issued by the board;
         (E) Standards for approval of continuing nursing education programs and courses for
registered nurses, advanced practice registered nurses, and licensed practical nurses. The standards
may provide for approval of continuing nursing education programs and courses that have been
approved by other state boards of nursing or by national accreditation systems for nursing, including,
but not limited to, the American nurses' credentialing center and the national association for practical
nurse education and service.
         (F) Standards that persons must meet to be authorized by the board to approve continuing
education programs and courses and a schedule by which that authorization expires and may be
renewed;
         (G) Requirements, including continuing education requirements, for reactivating inactive
licenses or certificates, and for reinstating licenses or certificates that have lapsed;
         (H) Conditions that may be imposed for reinstatement of a license or certificate following
action taken under section 3123.47, 4723.28, 4723.281, 4723.652, or 4723.86 of the Revised Code
resulting in a license or certificate suspension;
         (I) Requirements for board approval of courses in medication administration by licensed
practical nurses;
         (J) Criteria for evaluating the qualifications of an applicant for a license to practice nursing as
a registered nurse, a license to practice nursing as an advanced practice registered nurse, or a license
to practice nursing as a licensed practical nurse for the purpose of issuing the license by the board's
endorsement of the applicant's authority to practice issued by the licensing agency of another state;
         (K) Universal and standard precautions that shall be used by each licensee or certificate
holder. The rules shall define and establish requirements for universal and standard precautions that
include the following:
         (1) Appropriate use of hand washing;
         (2) Disinfection and sterilization of equipment;
         (3) Handling and disposal of needles and other sharp instruments;
         (4) Wearing and disposal of gloves and other protective garments and devices.
         (L) Quality assurance standards for advanced practice registered nurses;
         (M) Additional criteria for the standard care arrangement required by section 4723.431 of the
Revised Code entered into by a clinical nurse specialist, certified nurse-midwife, or certified nurse
practitioner and the nurse's collaborating physician or podiatrist;
         (N) For purposes of division (B)(31) of section 4723.28 of the Revised Code, the actions,
omissions, or other circumstances that constitute failure to establish and maintain professional
boundaries with a patient;
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                          134th G.A.
                                                  76
         (O) Standards and procedures for delegation under section 4723.48 of the Revised Code of
the authority to administer drugs.
         The board may adopt other rules necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. The
rules shall be adopted in accordance with Chapter 119. of the Revised Code.
         Sec. 4723.072. (A) From the effective date of this section through January 31, 2028, a
prelicensure nursing education program leading to initial licensure to practice nursing as a licensed
practical nurse may use as a member of its faculty any individual who meets either of the following
conditions:
         (1) Holds a baccalaureate degree in nursing;
         (2) Is scheduled to receive a baccalaureate degree in nursing within twelve calendar months
after the date the program first uses the individual as a member of its faculty.
         (B)(1) During the period specified in division (A) of this section, the board of nursing shall
not refuse to grant full approval to, or renew approval for, a prelicensure nursing education program
solely on the basis that the program uses as a member of its faculty an individual described in
division (A) of this section.
         (2) On and after February 1, 2028, the board shall not refuse to grant full approval to, or
renew approval for, a prelicensure nursing education program solely on the basis that the program
uses as a member of its faculty an individual described in division (A) of this section if the program
was approved or applied for approval during the period specified in division (A) of this section.
         (C) Nothing in this section prohibits the board from adopting rules on or after February 1,
2028, to authorize a prelicensure nursing education program to use as a member of its faculty an
individual described in division (A) of this section.
         Sec. 5747.057. (A) As used in this section:
         (1) "Eligible employee" means an employee who is nineteen years of age or younger and
enrolled in a career-technical education program approved under section 3317.161 of the Revised
Code.
         (2) "Eligible compensation" means compensation paid on and after the effective date of this
section from which the employer is required to deduct and withhold income tax under section
5747.06 of the Revised Code.
         (B) A nonrefundable credit is allowed against a taxpayer's aggregate tax liability under
section 5747.02 of the Revised Code for a taxpayer that holds a tax credit certificate issued under this
section. The credit equals the amount listed on the certificate and shall be claimed for the taxable
year that includes the last day of the calendar year for which the certificate was issued. The credit
shall be claimed in the order required under section 5747.98 of the Revised Code.
         (C) An employer that is a taxpayer or a pass-through entity and that employs an eligible
employee in fulfillment of a work-based learning experience, internship, or cooperative education
program associated with the career-technical education program in which the eligible employee is
enrolled may apply to the department of education for a tax credit certificate. The application shall be
made on forms prescribed by the department, in consultation with the tax commissioner, on or after
the first day of January and on or before the first day of February of each year. The application shall
include all of the following information for the calendar year preceding the year in which the
application is made:
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                              134th G.A.
                                                    77
         (1) The amount of eligible compensation paid by the applicant to each of its eligible
employees;
         (2) The name, birth date, and social security number of each eligible employee employed by
the applicant;
         (3) The career-technical education program in which each eligible employee is enrolled;
         (4) A description of each eligible employee's duties as part of the employee's work-based
learning experience, internship, or cooperative education program;
         (5) Any other information requested by the department.
         (D)(1) After determining that the applicant satisfies the conditions described in division (C)
of this section, the department of education shall issue, within sixty days after the receipt of a
complete application under that division, a tax credit certificate to the applicant equal to the lesser of
(a) fifteen per cent of the eligible compensation paid by the applicant to all eligible employees during
the calendar year or (b) five thousand dollars per eligible employee, in either case subject to the
limitations in division (D)(2) of this section.
         (2) If the applicant pays eligible compensation to an employee who ceases to qualify as an
eligible employee during the calendar year, only the eligible compensation paid to the employee
while the employee qualified as an eligible employee may be used to calculate the credit amount on a
tax credit certificate issued under this section. The department shall not issue certificates in a total
amount that would cause the tax credits claimed in any fiscal biennium to exceed five million dollars.
         (3) Each tax credit certificate issued under this section shall include a unique identification
number and shall state the amount of tax credit that may be claimed. A taxpayer claiming the credit
allowed under this section shall submit a copy of the certificate with the taxpayer's return or report.
         (E) If a tax credit certificate is issued to a pass-through entity under this section, any taxpayer
that is a direct or indirect investor in the pass-through entity on the last day of the entity's taxable
year ending in the calendar year for which the certificate was issued may claim the taxpayer's
distributive or proportionate share of the credit against the taxpayer's aggregate tax liability under
section 5747.02 of the Revised Code.
         (F) For the purpose of issuing tax credit certificates under this section, the department of
education may request from any of the following entities the data verification code assigned under
division (D)(2) of section 3301.0714 of the Revised Code to any student who is included on an
application made pursuant to division (C) of this section as an eligible employee:
         (1) The student's resident district;
         (2) The district or school offering the career-technical education program in which the student
is enrolled;
         (3) The independent contractor engaged to create and maintain student data verification
codes.
         The department may not release a data verification code received under this division to any
person except as authorized by law. Any document related to the tax credit authorized under this
section that the department maintains in its files that contains both a student's name or other
personally identifiable information and the student's data verification code is not a public record as
defined in section 149.43 of the Revised Code.
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                          134th G.A.
                                                  78
       SECTION 2. That existing sections 3301.0714, 3307.01, 3309.01, 3310.032, 3310.70, 3313.976,
3314.016, 3314.021, 3314.074, 3317.011, 3317.014, 3317.016, 3317.017, 3317.019, 3317.0110,
3317.02, 3317.024, 3317.0212, 3317.0215, 3317.051, 3317.064, 3317.25, 3319.077, 3319.078,
3323.25, 3323.251, 3326.39, 4723.07, and 5747.057 of the Revised Code are hereby repealed.


         SECTION 3. That Sections 265.150, 265.210, 265.225, and 265.335 of H.B. 110 of the 134th
General Assembly be amended to read as follows:
         Sec. 265.150. PUPIL TRANSPORTATION
         Of the foregoing appropriation item 200502, Pupil Transportation, up to $838,930 in each
fiscal year may be used by the Department of Education for training prospective and experienced
school bus drivers in accordance with training programs prescribed by the Department. A portion of
these funds may also be used to pay for costs associated with the enrollment of bus drivers in the
retained applicant fingerprint database.
         Of the foregoing appropriation item 200502, Pupil Transportation, $250,000 in each fiscal
year shall be used to award transportation collaboration grants pursuant to section 3317.072 of the
Revised Code. An amount equal to the unexpended, unencumbered balance of this set-aside at the
end of fiscal year 2022 is hereby reappropriated for the same purpose for fiscal year 2023.
Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the Department may allow grant recipients to
carry over funds for expenses incurred in the fiscal year following the year the grant award was made
according to guidelines established by the Department of Education.
         Of the foregoing appropriation item 200502, Pupil Transportation, up to $117,469,220 in
fiscal year 2022 and up to $123,469,220 in fiscal year 2023 may be used by the Department for
special education transportation reimbursements to school districts and county DD boards for
transportation operating costs as provided in divisions (C) and (F) of section 3317.024 of the Revised
Code.
         The remainder of the foregoing appropriation item 200502, Pupil Transportation, shall be
used to distribute the amounts calculated for transportation aid under divisions (E), (F), (G), (H), and
(I) of section 3317.0212, and division (A)(2) of section 3317.019 of the Revised Code.
         PAYMENTS IN LIEU OF TRANSPORTATION
         For purposes of division (D) of section 3327.02 of the Revised Code, if a parent, guardian, or
other person in charge of a pupil accepts an offer from a school district of payment in lieu of
providing transportation for the pupil, the school district shall pay that parent, guardian, or other
person an amount not less than fifty per cent and not more than the amount determined by the
Department as the average cost of pupil transportation for the previous school year. Payment may be
prorated if the time period involved is only a part of the school year.
         DATA REPORTING
         For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, each city, local, and exempted village school district shall
report, in a manner determined by the Department, the average number of students riding on school
buses only routed to community schools established under Chapter 3314. of the Revised Code,
STEM schools established under Chapter 3326. of the Revised Code, or nonpublic schools in
accordance with section 3327.01 of the Revised Code.
         Sec. 265.210. FOUNDATION FUNDING - ALL STUDENTS
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                           134th G.A.
                                                   79
         Of the portion of the formula aid distributed to city, local, and exempted village school
districts, joint vocational school districts, community schools, and STEM schools under this section,
an amount in each fiscal year, as calculated by the Department of Education, shall be used for the
purposes of division (B) of section 3317.0215 of the Revised Code.
         Of the foregoing appropriation item 200550, Foundation Funding - All Students, up to
$3,800,000 in each fiscal year shall be used to fund gifted education at educational service centers.
The Department shall distribute the funding through the unit-based funding methodology in place
under division (L) of section 3317.024, division (E) of section 3317.05, and divisions (A), (B), and
(C) of section 3317.053 of the Revised Code as they existed prior to fiscal year 2010.
         Of the foregoing appropriation item 200550, Foundation Funding - All Students, up to
$42,500,000 in fiscal year 2022 and up to $45,000,000 in fiscal year 2023 shall be reserved to fund
the state reimbursement of educational service centers under section 3317.11 of the Revised Code.
         Of the foregoing appropriation item 200550, Foundation Funding - All Students, up to
$3,500,000 in each fiscal year shall be distributed to educational service centers for School
Improvement Initiatives and for the provision of technical assistance to schools and districts
consistent with requirements of section 3312.01 of the Revised Code. The Department may distribute
these funds through a competitive grant process.
         Of the foregoing appropriation item 200550, Foundation Funding - All Students, up to
$7,000,000 in each fiscal year shall be reserved for payments under the section of this act H.B. 110 of
the 134th General Assembly entitled "POWER PLANT VALUATION ADJUSTMENT." If this
amount is not sufficient, the Superintendent of Public Instruction may reallocate excess funds for
other purposes supported by this appropriation item in order to fully pay the amounts required by that
section, provided that the aggregate amount appropriated in appropriation item 200550, Foundation
Funding - All Students, is not exceeded.
         Of the foregoing appropriation item 200550, Foundation Funding - All Students, up to
$2,000,000 in each fiscal year shall be used to support the administration of state scholarship
programs.
         Of the foregoing appropriation item 200550, Foundation Funding - All Students, up to
$3,000,000 in each fiscal year may be used for payment of the College Credit Plus Program for
students instructed at home pursuant to section 3321.04 of the Revised Code.
         Of the foregoing appropriation item 200550, Foundation Funding - All Students, an amount
shall be available in each fiscal year to be paid to joint vocational school districts in accordance with
sections 3317.16 and 3317.162 of the Revised Code and the section of this act H.B. 110 of the 134th
General Assembly entitled "FORMULA TRANSITION SUPPLEMENT."
         Of the foregoing appropriation item 200550, Foundation Funding - All Students, up to
$700,000 in each fiscal year shall be used by the Department for a program to pay for educational
services for youth who have been assigned by a juvenile court or other authorized agency to any of
the facilities described in division (A) of the section of this act H.B. 110 of the 134th General
Assembly entitled "PRIVATE TREATMENT FACILITY PROJECT."
         Of the foregoing appropriation item 200550, Foundation Funding - All Students, a portion
may be used to pay college-preparatory boarding schools the per pupil boarding amount pursuant to
section 3328.34 of the Revised Code.
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                             134th G.A.
                                                    80
        Of the foregoing appropriation item 200550, Foundation Funding - All Students, up to
$1,760,000 in each fiscal year may be used by the Department for duties and activities related to the
establishment of academic distress commissions under section 3302.10 of the Revised Code, to
provide support and assistance to academic distress commissions to further their duties under Chapter
3302. of the Revised Code, and to provide technical assistance and tools to support districts subject
to academic distress commissions.
        Of the foregoing appropriation item 200550, Foundation Funding - All Students, up to
$1,500,000 in each fiscal year shall be distributed to the Ohio STEM Learning Network to support
the expansion of free STEM programming aligned to Ohio's STEM priorities, to create regional
STEM supports targeting underserved student populations, and to support the Ohio STEM
Committee's STEM school designation process.
        Of the foregoing appropriation item 200550, Foundation Funding - All Students, up to
$2,500,000 in each fiscal year shall be used to make supplemental payments under Section 5 of H.B.
123 of the 133rd General Assembly, as amended by this act H.B. 110 of the 134th General Assembly.
If the amount appropriated is insufficient, the Department shall prorate the payments so that the
aggregate amount appropriated in this section is not exceeded.
        The remainder of the foregoing appropriation item 200550, Foundation Funding - All
Students, shall be used to distribute the amounts calculated for formula aid under division (B) of
section 3313.979, division (A)(1) of section 3317.019, section 3317.022 of the Revised Code, and the
section of this act H.B. 110 of the 134th General Assembly entitled "FORMULA TRANSITION
SUPPLEMENT." and to make payments pursuant to Section 14 of H.B. 583 of the 134th General
Assembly.
        Appropriation items 200502, Pupil Transportation, and 200550, Foundation Funding - All
Students, other than specific set-asides, are collectively used in each fiscal year to pay state formula
aid obligations for school districts, community schools, STEM schools, college preparatory boarding
schools, joint vocational school districts, and state scholarship programs under this act H.B. 110 of
the 134th General Assembly. The first priority of these appropriation items, with the exception of
specific set-asides, is to fund state formula aid obligations. It may be necessary to reallocate funds
among these appropriation items or use excess funds from other General Revenue Fund appropriation
items in the Department of Education's budget, including appropriation item 200903, Property Tax
Reimbursement - Education, in each fiscal year in order to meet state formula aid obligations. If it is
determined that it is necessary to transfer funds among these appropriation items or to transfer funds
from other General Revenue Fund appropriations in the Department's budget to meet state formula
aid obligations, the Superintendent of Public Instruction shall seek approval from the Director of
Budget and Management to transfer funds as needed.
        The Superintendent of Public Instruction shall make payments, transfers, and deductions, as
authorized by Title XXXIII of the Revised Code in amounts substantially equal to those made in the
prior year, or otherwise, at the discretion of the Superintendent, until at least the effective date of the
amendments and enactments made to Title XXXIII of the Revised Code by this act H.B. 110 of the
134th General Assembly. Any funds paid to districts or schools under this section shall be credited
toward the annual funds calculated for the district or school after the changes made to Title XXXIII
of the Revised Code in this act H.B. 110 of the 134th General Assembly are effective. Upon the
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                            134th G.A.
                                                   81
effective date of changes made to Title XXXIII of the Revised Code in this act H.B. 110 of the 134th
General Assembly, funds shall be calculated as an annual amount.
         Sec. 265.225. FORMULA TRANSITION SUPPLEMENT
         (A)(1) For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, the Department of Education shall pay a formula
transition supplement to each city, local, and exempted village school district according to the
following formula:
  (The district's funding base for fiscal year 2021) - (the district's payments for the fiscal
   year for which the supplement is calculated under sections 3317.019, 3317.022, and
                                3317.0212 of the Revised Code)
          If the computation made under division (A)(1) of this section for a fiscal year results in a
negative number, the district's formula transition supplement for that fiscal year shall be zero.
          (2) For purposes of division (A)(1) of this section, a city, local, or exempted village school
district's "funding base for fiscal year 2021" means the amount calculated as follows:
          (a) Compute the sum of the following:
          (i) The amount calculated for the district for fiscal year 2021 under division (A)(1) of Section
265.220 of H.B. 166 of the 133rd General Assembly after any adjustments required under Section
265.227 of H.B. 166 of the 133rd General Assembly and before any funding reductions authorized by
Executive Order 2020-19D, issued on May 7, 2020, and Executive Order 2021-01D, issued on
January 22, 2021;
          (ii) The amount calculated for the district for fiscal year 2021 under division (A)(2) of
Section 265.220 of H.B. 166 of the 133rd General Assembly before any funding reductions
authorized by Executive Order 2020-19D, issued on May 7, 2020, and Executive Order 2021-01D,
issued on January 22, 2021;
          (iii) The amount calculated for the district for fiscal year 2021 under division (B) of Section
265.220 of H.B. 166 of the 133rd General Assembly;
          (iv) The district's payments for fiscal year 2021 under divisions (C)(1), (2), (3), and (4) of
section 3313.981 of the Revised Code as those divisions existed for payments for fiscal year 2021;
          (v) The district's payments for fiscal year 2021 under section 3317.0219 of the Revised Code
as that section existed for payments for fiscal year 2021 and under Section 20 of S.B. 310 of the
133rd General Assembly.
          (b) Subtract from the amount calculated in division (A)(2)(a) of this section the sum of the
following:
          (i) The payments deducted from the district and paid to a community school established
under Chapter 3314. of the Revised Code for fiscal year 2021 under divisions (C)(1)(a), (b), (c), (d),
(e), (f), and (g) of section 3314.08 of the Revised Code and division (D) of section 3314.091 of the
Revised Code, as those divisions existed for deductions and payments for fiscal year 2021, in
accordance with division (A) of Section 265.230 of H.B. 166 of the 133rd General Assembly, before
any funding reductions authorized by Executive Order 2020-19D, issued on May 7, 2020, and
Executive Order 2021-01D, issued on January 22, 2021;
          (ii) The payments deducted from the district and paid to a science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics school established under Chapter 3326. of the Revised Code for fiscal year 2021,
under divisions (A), (B), (C), (D), (E), (F), and (G) of section 3326.33 of the Revised Code as those
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                            134th G.A.
                                                   82
divisions existed for deductions and payments for fiscal year 2021, in accordance with division (A)
of Section 265.235 of H.B. 166 of the 133rd General Assembly, before any funding reductions
authorized by Executive Order 2020-19D, issued on May 7, 2020, and Executive Order 2021-01D,
issued on January 22, 2021;
         (iii) The payments deducted from the district for fiscal year 2021 under division (C) of
section 3310.08 of the Revised Code as that division existed for deductions for fiscal year 2021,
division (C)(2) of section 3310.41 of the Revised Code, as that division existed for deductions for
fiscal year 2021, and section 3310.55 of the Revised Code as that section existed for deductions for
fiscal year 2021 and, in the case of a pilot project school district as defined in section 3313.975 of the
Revised Code, the funds deducted from the district for fiscal year 2021 under Section 265.210 of
H.B. 166 of the 133rd General Assembly to operate the pilot project scholarship program for fiscal
year 2021 under sections 3313.974 to 3313.979 of the Revised Code;
         (iv) The payments subtracted from the district for fiscal year 2021 under divisions (B)(1), (2),
and (3) of section 3313.981 of the Revised Code, as those divisions existed for subtractions from the
district for fiscal year 2021.
         (B)(1) For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, the Department of Education shall pay a formula
transition supplement to each joint vocational school district according to the following formula:
  (The district's funding base for fiscal year 2021) - (the district's payments for the fiscal
 year for which the supplement is calculated under sections 3317.16 and 3317.162 of the
                                        Revised Code)
         If the computation made under division (B)(1) of this section for a fiscal year results in a
negative number, the district's formula transition supplement for that fiscal year shall be zero.
         (2) For purposes of division (B)(1) of this section, a joint vocational district's "funding base
for fiscal year 2021" means the sum of the following:
         (a) The district's payments for fiscal year 2021 under Section 265.225 of H.B. 166 of the
133rd General Assembly after any adjustments required under Section 265.227 of H.B. 166 of the
133rd General Assembly;
         (b) The district's payments for fiscal year 2021 under divisions (D)(1), and (2), and (E)(3) of
section 3313.981 of the Revised Code, as those divisions existed for payments for fiscal year 2021;
         (c) The district's payments for fiscal year 2021 under section 3317.163 of the Revised Code
as that section existed for payments for fiscal year 2021 and under Section 20 of S.B. 310 of the
133rd General Assembly.
         (C)(1) For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, the Department of Education shall pay a formula
transition supplement to each community school established under Chapter 3314. of the Revised
Code according to the following formula:
[(The school's funding base for fiscal year 2021 / the number of students enrolled in the
  school for fiscal year 2021) – (the school's payments for the fiscal year for which the
supplement is calculated under sections 3317.022 and 3317.0212 of the Revised Code /
     the number of students enrolled in the school for the fiscal year for which the
supplement is calculated)] X the number of students enrolled in the school for the fiscal
                       year for which the supplement is calculated.
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                         134th G.A.
                                                  83
         If the computation made under division (C)(1) of this section for a fiscal year results in a
negative number, the school's formula transition supplement for that fiscal year shall be zero.
         (2) For purposes of division (C)(1) of this section, a community school's "funding base for
fiscal year 2021" means the sum of the following:
         (a) The amount calculated for the school for fiscal year 2021 under division (C)(1) of section
3314.08 of the Revised Code as that section existed for payments for fiscal year 2021, before any
funding reductions authorized by Executive Order 2020-19D, issued on May 7, 2020, and Executive
Order 2021-01D, issued on January 22, 2021;
         (b) The amount calculated for the school for fiscal year 2021 under section 3314.085 of the
Revised Code as that section existed for payments for fiscal year 2021;
         (c) The amount calculated for the school for fiscal year 2021 under division (D)(1) of section
3314.091 of the Revised Code as that division existed for payments for fiscal year 2021;
         (d) The amount calculated for the school for fiscal year 2021 under section 3314.088 of the
Revised Code as that section existed for payments for fiscal year 2021 and under Section 20 of S.B.
310 of the 133rd General Assembly.
         (D)(1) For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, the Department of Education shall pay a formula
transition supplement to each science, technology, engineering, and mathematics school established
under Chapter 3326. of the Revised Code according to the following formula:
 [(The school's funding base for fiscal year 2021 / the number of students enrolled in the
   school for fiscal year 2021) – (the school's payments for the fiscal year for which the
  supplement is calculated under section 3317.022 of the Revised Code / the number of
       students enrolled in the school for the fiscal year for which the supplement is
     calculated)] X the number of students enrolled in the school for the fiscal year for
                            which the supplement is calculated.
         If the computation made under division (D)(1) of this section for a fiscal year results in a
negative number, the school's formula transition supplement for that fiscal year shall be zero.
         (2) For purposes of division (D)(1) of this section, a science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics school's "funding base for fiscal year 2021" means the sum of the following:
         (a) The amount calculated for the school for fiscal year 2021 under section 3326.33 of the
Revised Code as that section existed for payments for fiscal year 2021, before any funding reductions
authorized by Executive Order 2020-19D, issued on May 7, 2020, and Executive Order 2021-01D,
issued on January 22, 2021;
         (b) The amount calculated for the school for fiscal year 2021 under section 3326.41 of the
Revised Code as that section existed for payments for fiscal year 2021;
         (c) The amount calculated for the school for fiscal year 2021 under section 3326.42 of the
Revised Code as that section existed for payments for fiscal year 2021 and under Section 20 of S.B.
310 of the 133rd General Assembly.
         Sec. 265.335. QUALITY COMMUNITY SCHOOLS SUPPORT
         (A) The foregoing appropriation item 200631, Quality Community Schools Support, shall be
used for the Quality Community School Support Program. Under the program, the Department of
Education shall pay each community school established under Chapter 3314. of the Revised Code
and designated as a Community School of Quality under this section an amount up to $1,750 in each
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                           134th G.A.
                                                   84
fiscal year for each pupil identified as economically disadvantaged and up to $1,000 in each fiscal
year for each pupil that is not identified as economically disadvantaged. The payment for the current
fiscal year shall be calculated using the final adjusted full-time equivalent number of students
enrolled in a community school for the prior fiscal year, except that if a school is in its first year of
operation the payment for the current fiscal year shall be calculated using the adjusted full-time
equivalent number of students enrolled in the school for the current fiscal year as of the date the
payment is made, as reported by the school under section 3314.08 of the Revised Code. The
Department shall make the payment to each Community School of Quality not later than January 31
of each fiscal year. If the amount appropriated is not sufficient, the Department shall prorate the
amounts so that the aggregate amount appropriated is not exceeded.
        (B) To be designated as a Community School of Quality, a community school shall satisfy at
least one of the following conditions:
        (1) The community school meets all of the following criteria:
        (a) The school's sponsor was rated "exemplary" or "effective" on the sponsor's most recent
evaluation conducted under section 3314.016 of the Revised Code.
        (b) The school received a higher performance index score than the school district in which
the school is located on the two most recent report cards issued for the school under section 3302.03
of the Revised Code.
        (c) The school received an overall grade of "A" or "B" for the value-added progress
dimension on the most recent report card issued for the school under section 3302.03 of the Revised
Code or is a school described under division (A)(4) of section 3314.35 of the Revised Code and did
not receive a grade for the value-added progress dimension on the most recent report card.
        (d) At least fifty per cent of the students enrolled in the school are economically
disadvantaged, as determined by the Department.
        (2) The community school meets all of the following criteria:
        (a) The school's sponsor was rated "exemplary" or "effective" on the sponsor's most recent
evaluation conducted under section 3314.016 of the Revised Code.
        (b) The school is in its first year of operation or the school opened as a kindergarten school
and has added one grade per year and has been in operation for less than four school years.
        (c) The school is replicating an operational and instructional model used by a community
school described in division (B)(1) of this section.
        (d) If the school has an operator, the operator received a "C" or better on its most recent
performance report published under section 3314.031 of the Revised Code.
        (3) The community school meets all of the following criteria:
        (a) The school's sponsor was rated "exemplary" or "effective" on the sponsor's most recent
evaluation conducted under section 3314.016 of the Revised Code.
        (b) The school contracts with an operator that operates schools in other states and meets at
least one of the following criteria:
        (i) Has operated a school that received a grant funded through the federal Charter School
Program established under 20 U.S.C. 7221 within the five years prior to the date of application or
received funding from the Charter School Growth Fund;
        (ii) Meets all of the following criteria:
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                           134th G.A.
                                                   85
         (I) One of the operator's schools in another state performed better than the school district in
which the school is located, as determined by the Department.
         (II) At least fifty per cent of the total number of students enrolled in all of the operator's
schools are economically disadvantaged, as determined by the Department.
         (III) The operator is in good standing in all states where it operates schools, as determined by
the Department.
         (IV) The Department has determined that the operator does not have any financial viability
issues that would prevent it from effectively operating a community school in Ohio.
         (c) The school is in its first year of operation.
         (C) A school designated as a Community School of Quality under division (B) of this section
shall maintain that designation for the two fiscal years following the fiscal year in which the school
was initially designated as a Community School of Quality.
         (D) A school designated a Community School of Quality may renew its designation each year
that it satisfies the criteria under division (B)(1) of this section. The school shall maintain that
designation for the two fiscal years following each fiscal year in which the criteria under division (B)
(1) of this section are satisfied. This division applies to schools designated as a Community School of
Quality based on the report cards issued in accordance with sections 3302.03 and 3314.012 of the
Revised Code for the 2017-2018 and 2018-2019 school years.
         (E) A school that was designated as a Community School of Quality for the first time for the
2019-2020 school year shall maintain that designation for the 2022-2023 school year and may renew
its designation under division (D) of this section after that school year.


       SECTION 4. That existing Sections 265.150, 265.210, 265.225, and 265.335 of H.B. 110 of the
134th General Assembly are hereby repealed.


         SECTION 5. That Section 5 of H.B. 123 of the 133rd General Assembly (as amended by H.B.
110 of the 134th General Assembly) be amended to read as follows:
         Sec. 5. (A) As used in this section:
         (1) "Eligible internet- or computer-based community school" means the following:
         (a) For fiscal year 2021, an internet- or computer-based community school that was
designated for the 2019-2020 school year as an internet- or computer-based community school in
which a majority of the students were enrolled in a dropout prevention and recovery program and
satisfies both of the following conditions:
         (i) The school does not have a for-profit operator;
         (ii) The school received a rating of "exceeds standards" on the combined graduation
component of the most recent report card issued for the school under section 3314.017 of the Revised
Code.
         (b) For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, an internet- or computer-based community school that
participated in the program for fiscal year 2021.
         (2) "Formula amount" shall equal the amount specified in division (F)(1) of the section of
H.B. 166 of the 133rd General Assembly entitled "OPERATING FUNDING FOR FISCAL YEARS
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                           134th G.A.
                                                   86
2020 and 2021."
         (3) "Internet- or computer-based community school" has the same meaning as in section
3314.02 of the Revised Code.
         (B) The Department of Education shall establish a pilot program to provide additional
funding for students enrolled in grades eight through twelve in eligible internet- or computer-based
community schools for fiscal years 2021, 2022, and 2023. An eligible internet- or computer-based
community school may choose to participate in the program by notifying the Department of
Education not later than ten days after December 21, 2020.
         (C) For fiscal years 2021, 2022, and 2023, the Department of Education shall require each
eligible internet- or computer-based community school that chooses to participate in the pilot
program to report all information that is necessary to make payments under division (D) of this
section.
         (D) For fiscal years 2021, 2022, and 2023, the Department shall calculate an additional
payment for each eligible internet- or computer-based community school that chooses to participate
in the pilot program, as follows:
         (1) Compute the lesser of the following for each student enrolled in grades eight through
twelve:
         (a) The formula amount X the maximum full-time equivalency for the portion of the school
year for which the student is enrolled in the school;
         (b) The sum of the following:
         (i) A one-time payment of $1,750. In the case of a student enrolled in the school for the first
time for the 2020-2021, 2021-2022, or 2022-2023 school year, payment shall be made under division
(D)(1)(b)(i) of this section at least thirty days after the student is considered to be enrolled in the
school in accordance with division (H)(2) of section 3314.08 of the Revised Code, provided the
student has been continuously enrolled in the school during that time, as determined by the
Department. In the case of a student that was enrolled in the school for the 2019-2020, 2020-2021, or
2021-2022 school year, payment shall be made under division (D)(1)(b)(i) of this section at least
thirty days after the student has started to participate in learning opportunities for the 2020-2021,
2021-2022, or 2022-2023 school year, provided the student has been continuously enrolled in the
school during that time, as determined by the Department.
         (ii) The formula amount X (1/920) X the lesser of the number of hours the student
participates in learning opportunities in that fiscal year or 920;
         (iii) The lesser of ($500 X either the number of courses completed by the student in that fiscal
year, in the case of a student enrolled in grade eight, or the number of credits earned by the student in
that fiscal year, in the case of a student enrolled in grades nine through twelve) or $2,500.
         (2) Compute the sum of the amounts calculated under division (D)(1) of this section for all
students enrolled in grades eight through twelve.
         (3) Compute the school's payment in accordance with the following formula:
         The amount determined under division (D)(2) of this section) - (the total amount paid to the
school for the fiscal year for which the payment is calculated under this section under division (C)(1)
(a) of section 3314.08 of the Revised Code for number of full-time equivalent students enrolled in
grades eight through twelve in the school X the formula amount)
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                        134th G.A.
                                                 87
        If the amount computed under division (D)(3) is a negative number, the school shall not
receive a payment under this section.
        (E)(1) The Department shall complete a review of the enrollment of each eligible internet- or
computer-based community school that chooses to participate in the pilot program in accordance
with division (K) of section 3314.08 of the Revised Code. If the Department determines a school has
been overpaid based on a review completed under division (E)(1) of this section, the Department
shall require a repayment of the overpaid funds and may require the school to establish a plan to
improve the reporting of enrollment.
        (2) The Department may require each eligible internet- or computer-based community school
that chooses to participate in the pilot program to create a debt reduction plan approved by the
school's sponsor, if determined appropriate by the Department.
        (3) To the extent that an eligible internet- or computer-based community school that chooses
to participate in the pilot program had, for the 2019-2020, 2020-2021, or 2021-2022 school year, a
percentage of student engagement in learning opportunities that was less than sixty-five per cent, the
school shall provide to the Department a meaningful plan for increasing student engagement.
        (4) All eligible internet- or computer-based community schools that choose to participate in
the pilot program shall implement programming or protocol which documents enrollment and
participation in learning opportunities in order to participate in the program.
        (F) Upon completion of the pilot program, and not later than December 31, 2022, the
Department shall issue a report on the program. For purposes of this report, the Department may
request each eligible internet- or computer-based community school that chooses to participate in the
pilot program to submit information to the Department on any of the following:
        (1) The time, resources, and cost associated with enrolling students in the school and
preparing students to engage in learning opportunities;
        (2) The time and cost associated with providing counseling and other supports to students;
        (3) Student enrollment and participation data;
        (4) Individualized student plans;
        (5) An assessment of strategies used to improve student engagement and the percentage of
participation in learning opportunities
        (6) Any other data the Department considers relevant.
        The Department shall submit copies of the report in accordance with section 101.68 of the
Revised Code to the Governor, the President and Minority Leader of the Senate, the Speaker and
Minority Leader of the House of Representatives, and the chairpersons and ranking members of the
standing committees on primary and secondary education of the Senate and the House of
Representatives.


       SECTION 6. That existing Section 5 of H.B. 123 of the 133rd General Assembly (as amended
by H.B. 110 of the 134th General Assembly) is hereby repealed.


       SECTION 7. That Section 4 of S.B. 1 of the 134th General Assembly be amended to read as
follows:
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                          134th G.A.
                                                   88
            Sec. 4. (A) As used in this section, "school governing body" means any of the following:
            (1) The board of education of a city, local, exempted village, or joint vocational school
district;
        (2) The governing authority of a community school established under Chapter 3314. of the
Revised Code;
        (3) The governing body of a STEM school established under Chapter 3326. of the Revised
Code;
        (4) The governing authority of a chartered nonpublic school;
        (5) The governing board of an educational service center or a regional council of
governments, established under Chapter 167. of the Revised Code, consisting of one or more
educational service centers that provide substitute teaching services.
        (B) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in sections 3301.071, 3319.226, 3319.30, and
3319.36 and Chapters 3314. and 3326. of the Revised Code, or the administrative rules of the State
Board of Education, a school governing body may employ an individual who does not hold a post-
secondary degree as a substitute teacher, for the 2021-2022, 2022-2023, and 2023-2024 school year
years only, provided that the individual also meets the following requirements:
        (1) The individual meets the district's or school's own set of educational requirements.
        (2) The individual is deemed to be of good moral character.
        (3) The individual successfully completes a criminal records check as prescribed in section
3319.39 of the Revised Code.
        (C) The State Board shall issue a nonrenewable temporary substitute teaching license to an
individual who does not hold a post-secondary degree but meets the requirements prescribed in
division (B) of this section for the 2021-2022, 2022-2023, and 2023-2024 school year years only.


       SECTION 8. That existing Section 4 of S.B. 1 of the 134th General Assembly is hereby
repealed.


         SECTION 9. All items in this act are hereby appropriated as designated out of any moneys in the
state treasury to the credit of the designated fund. For all operating appropriations made in this act,
those in the first column are for fiscal year 2022 and those in the second column are for fiscal year
2023. The operating appropriations made in this act are in addition to any other operating
appropriations made for the FY 2022-FY 2023 biennium.




             1          2                     3                          4                   5

A                                  EDU DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

B     Federal Fund Group
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                          134th G.A.
                                                  89

C    3HS0      200640        Federal Coronavirus School                 $2,415,201                  $0
                             Relief

D    TOTAL FED Federal Fund Group                                       $2,415,201                  $0

E     TOTAL ALL BUDGET FUND GROUPS                                        $2,415,201                 $0
        FEDERAL CORONAVIRUS SCHOOL RELIEF
        (A) The foregoing appropriation item 200640, Federal Coronavirus School Relief, shall be
used by the Department of Education for the following purposes regarding the tutoring and remedial
education services program established in section 3301.28 of the Revised Code:
        (1) For purposes of division (C)(3) of section 3301.28 of the Revised Code;
        (2) To reimburse the coordinating service center, as defined in section 3301.28 of the Revised
Code, for the costs described in divisions (C)(6)(a) and (b) of that section and to pay costs associated
with enrolling participating tutors in the retained applicant fingerprint database;
        (3) Subject to available funds, to pay incidental costs of training opportunities conducted by
educational service centers under division (C)(4) of that section, in a manner determined by the
Department.
        (B) An amount equal to the unexpended, unencumbered balance of the foregoing
appropriation item 200640, Federal Coronavirus School Relief, at the end of fiscal year 2022 is
hereby reappropriated to the Department to be used for the same purposes in fiscal year 2023.
        (C) The foregoing appropriation item 200640, Federal Coronavirus School Relief, shall be
supported using the funds for emergency needs authorized under Title II, Sec. 2001(f)(4) of the
federal "American Rescue Plan Act of 2021," Pub. L. No. 117-2.


        SECTION 10. Within the limits set forth in this act, the Director of Budget and Management
shall establish accounts indicating the source and amount of funds for each appropriation made in
this act, and shall determine the form and manner in which appropriation accounts shall be
maintained. Expenditures from operating appropriations contained in this act shall be accounted for
as though made in H.B. 110 of the 134th General Assembly. The operating appropriations made in
this act are subject to all provisions of H.B. 110 of the 134th General Assembly that are generally
applicable to such appropriations.


       SECTION 11. (A) The Substitute Teacher Shortages Study Committee is hereby established.
The study committee shall consist of the following members:
       (1) Three members of the House of Representatives appointed by the Speaker of the House of
Representatives, two of whom are members of the majority party and one of whom is a member of
the minority party. The Speaker shall appoint the member of the minority party in consultation with
the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives.
       (2) Three members of the Senate appointed by the President of the Senate, two of whom are
members of the majority party and one of whom is a member of the minority party. The President
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                           134th G.A.
                                                   90
shall appoint the member of the minority party in consultation with the Minority Leader of the
Senate.
        (B) The study committee established under this section shall address the shortage of
substitute teachers and examine the temporary substitute licensing provision prescribed in Section 3
of H.B. 409 of the 133rd General Assembly and Section 4 of S.B. 1 of the 134th General Assembly.
        The study committee shall consider addressing the causes of the shortage and how to
alleviate that shortage with more permanent solutions.
        (C) The study committee shall produce a report of its findings not later than December 31,
2022.


        SECTION 12. (A) As used in this section, "public school" means any of the following:
        (1) A city, local, exempted village, or joint vocational school district;
        (2) A community school established under Chapter 3314. of the Revised Code;
        (3) A STEM school established under Chapter 3326. of the Revised Code.
        (B) Any state funds that a public school spent providing services related to disadvantaged
pupil impact aid or providing services to gifted students or English learners as determined by the
Department of Education, on or after July 1, 2021, but prior to September 30, 2021, shall be applied
by the Department to any spending requirements prescribed for those services for fiscal year 2022
under Chapter 3314., 3317., or 3326. of the Revised Code, as those chapters exist on and after
September 30, 2021.


        SECTION 13. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in section 3317.0212 or Chapter 3327.
of the Revised Code, in fiscal years 2022 and 2023, the statewide average cost per rider and
statewide average cost per mile used to calculate funding under section 3317.0212 of the Revised
Code and payment in lieu of transportation payment under section 3327.02 shall be based on data
from fiscal year 2020.


        SECTION 14. For up to ninety days after the effective date of this section, a chartered nonpublic
school participating in the Educational Choice Scholarship Pilot Program under sections 3310.01 to
3310.17 of the Revised Code, including the income-based expansion of that program under section
3310.032 of the Revised Code, may request that the Department of Education review the scholarship
payments made for eligible students, as defined in section 3310.01 of the Revised Code, participating
in the program for the 2020-2021 school year who attended the school during that school year and
determine whether there was a scholarship payment error for any such student for that school year. If
the Department finds that scholarship payments for any such student for that school year were less
than they should have been based on the student's attendance at the school, the Department shall
make a payment to the school, on behalf of the student, in an amount equal to the difference between
the total amount of scholarship payments made to the student for that school year and the total
amount the scholarship payments should have been.
        The Department shall make payments under this section from appropriation line item 200550
in accordance with Section 265.210 of H.B. 110 of the 134th General Assembly, as amended by this
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                            134th G.A.
                                                   91
act.


         SECTION 15. A student who received an educational choice scholarship under section 3310.032
of the Revised Code on the effective date of this section whose scholarship amount was prorated
under division (E) of that section as it existed prior to that date shall, on and after that date, receive
the full scholarship amount.


        SECTION 16. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in section 3314.08 of the Revised Code,
a community school established under Chapter 3314. of the Revised Code shall be considered as
having met any requirements to receive state funds prescribed under Chapters 3314. and 3317. of the
Revised Code for the 2021-2022 school year, if all of the following apply to the school:
        (A) The community school opened for the first time during the 2021-2022 school year.
        (B) The community school has the same sponsor as another community school that was open
during the 2020-2021 school year and 2021-2022 school year and operated using a remote learning
plan model for both of those school years.
        (C) During the 2021-2022 school year, the community school implemented the same remote
learning plan model as the community school described in division (B) of this section.


        SECTION 17. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in section 3314.034 of the Revised
Code, for the 2022-2023 school year only, a community school to which division (A) of that section
applies, based on the school's state report card issued for the 2021-2022 school year under section
3302.03 or 3314.017 of the Revised Code, may enter into a contract with a new sponsor without
regard to the conditions prescribed in divisions (B) to (D) of section 3314.034 of the Revised Code.


         SECTION 18. (A) Notwithstanding anything in section 3314.016 of the Revised Code to the
contrary, community school sponsor ratings issued under that section for the 2021-2022 school year
shall have no effect in determining sanctions or penalties of a sponsor under Chapter 3314. of the
Revised Code but shall not create a new starting point for sanction or penalty determinations that are
based on ratings over multiple years. The sponsor ratings of any previous or subsequent school years
shall be considered when a sponsor is subject to sanctions or penalties under that chapter. Sponsor
ratings for the 2021-2022 school year shall not be used to determine the revocation of sponsorship
under division (B)(7)(c)(ii) of section 3314.016 of the Revised Code.
         (B) A sponsor shall remain eligible in the 2022-2023 school year for any incentives that the
sponsor was eligible for in the 2021-2022 school year, and the 2021-2022 school year shall not count
toward the number of years in which a sponsor subject to division (B)(7)(b) of section 3314.016 of
the Revised Code is not required to be evaluated. However, a sponsor's rating for the 2021-2022
school year shall not qualify the sponsor for any incentive for which the sponsor was not previously
eligible prior to receiving that rating, unless the sponsor elects to have the sponsor's rating for the
2021-2022 school year count for the purposes of qualifying for incentives under division (C) of this
section.
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                                           134th G.A.
                                                   92
         (C) Any sponsor may elect to have the sponsor's overall rating for the 2021-2022 school year
count toward qualifying the sponsor for any incentives for which the sponsor was not previously
eligible, provided the overall rating for that school year is calculated based on the three components
identified in division (B)(1) of section 3314.016 of the Revised Code.


        SECTION 19. Section 3301.0714 of the Revised Code is presented in this act as a composite of
the section as amended by both H.B. 82 and H.B. 110 of the 134th General Assembly. The General
Assembly, applying the principle stated in division (B) of section 1.52 of the Revised Code that
amendments are to be harmonized if reasonably capable of simultaneous operation, finds that the
composite is the resulting version of the section in effect prior to the effective date of the section as
presented in this act.
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                           134th G.A.
                                  93




      Speaker ___________________ of the House of Representatives.




                     President ___________________ of the Senate.



Passed ________________________, 20____



Approved ________________________, 20____




                                                        Governor.
Sub. H. B. No. 583                                                134th G.A.
                                    94


  The section numbering of law of a general and permanent nature is
complete and in conformity with the Revised Code.




                            Director, Legislative Service Commission.



Filed in the office of the Secretary of State at Columbus, Ohio, on the ____
day of ___________, A. D. 20____.




                                                    Secretary of State.



File No. _________       Effective Date ___________________